[Amit Varma]: During this episode, I was moved by something that my guest said. He spoke about how awkward
[Amit Varma]: he felt when his father tried to hug him. And that reminded me of my own father. In
[Amit Varma]: his last years before he died, I felt that he was opening up in ways that neither of
[Amit Varma]: us were used to. Once when I visited him in Chandigarh, as I was leaving, about to get
[Amit Varma]: into my taxi outside the house, he opened his arms for a hug. It was an awkward moment.
[Amit Varma]: I was both happy and moved, but I hid the emotion. On one trip home, he even thanked
[Amit Varma]: me for coming, which was also out of character because he was always so blase about it. When
[Amit Varma]: episode 200 of the show came out, which is basically a long interview of me by my guest,
[Amit Varma]: he actually said he was proud of me, which was stunningly expressive, given his past
[Amit Varma]: record of reticence of being a hard man. It's a regret I have that I didn't peel back past
[Amit Varma]: all those layers, both his layers and mine, while he was still here. Maybe if I had heard
[Amit Varma]: this episode, I would have. Here's the thing. I have done many episodes where I have discussed
[Amit Varma]: feminism and the lives that women lead. Indeed, the title of this episode follows on from
[Amit Varma]: episode 259, The Loneliness of the Indian Women. At this point in time, in 2022, anyone
[Amit Varma]: listening to this show understands the many layers of oppression that women live with
[Amit Varma]: and normalize and that we must fight against. We have language for what happens to them,
[Amit Varma]: phrases like mansplaining and gaslighting and so on and on. We have frames to explain it.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, it isn't just women who are victims of patriarchy. Men are also diminished
[Amit Varma]: by it. They are trapped in roles, in grooves laid out for them. Here's what it means to
[Amit Varma]: be a man, to be a provider, to be a father, to be a son. You play that role, you get the
[Amit Varma]: job done, you don't cry at movies, don't show emotion, don't be a wuss. And many of us often
[Amit Varma]: get with the program and don't question what being male does to us. We have no language
[Amit Varma]: to describe this. We keep our emotions bottled up inside us, not expressing them to others,
[Amit Varma]: not even expressing them to ourselves. So what my guest speaks at length about in this
[Amit Varma]: episode should not be a surprise. The loneliness of the Indian man, the mental health problems
[Amit Varma]: that young people throughout this country are having to confront, and what this does
[Amit Varma]: to our society. This is all unseen. And there's a big lesson here. Men who call themselves
[Amit Varma]: feminists like me, need to not only think about how they look at women, but also how
[Amit Varma]: they look at themselves. Their kindness has to go in that direction as well. Only kindness
[Unknown]: can save us.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Nikhil Taneja, who trained as an
[Amit Varma]: engineer, began working life as a journalist at Hindustan Times, went on to MTV and to
[Amit Varma]: Yash Raj Films, where he was a general manager at the age of 30. Then he was crippled by
[Amit Varma]: anxiety and decided to confront his mental health issues. And he realized that many of
[Amit Varma]: the problems he faced came straight out of his being a man. He quit his job, did therapy,
[Amit Varma]: and later started Yuva, an organization that makes content, builds communities, and carries
[Amit Varma]: out research that's meant to understand and empower young Indians everywhere. Now, I think
[Amit Varma]: of my episodes as being stimulating conversations, deep dives akin to oral histories. And this
[Amit Varma]: episode is all of them. But it's also an episode that can change lives. Something I felt about
[Amit Varma]: my episode with Shrayana as well. We discuss a growing loneliness in our connected world.
[Amit Varma]: We discuss anxiety and mental health. We discuss the immense power of storytelling. What Nikhil
[Amit Varma]: has done with it is so unique and inspiring. We talk about the kindness project and initiative
[Amit Varma]: of Nikhil's and why most of all, we need to be kind to ourselves. So do listen and do
[Amit Varma]: share it with anyone you think may be interested. I know it's a long episode, but it contains
[Amit Varma]: multitudes. Before we get there, though, let's take a quick commercial break even though
[Amit Varma]: what the commercials are me only. That's how it is.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 per GST
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com slash clear writing. Being a
[Amit Varma]: good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thank you for having me Amit. Yeah, I've been
[Amit Varma]: thinking of inviting you for a long time though, got down to it fairly recently, but I'm actually
[Amit Varma]: glad that I didn't invite you say two years ago, because the show was much shorter than
[Amit Varma]: and I just feel that you're a guest who's tailor made for this longer format where one
[Amit Varma]: can kind of go deep into oneself and introspect about the world. And that's that's one thing
[Amit Varma]: I've also really enjoyed about the talks you've given in your columns with HT, where, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there are various places where it feels like you're almost thinking aloud in the same
[Amit Varma]: way that I do about the same things I care about. So I really enjoyed that. One of the
[Amit Varma]: interesting things you mentioned in your column is that you are the last generation to grow
[Amit Varma]: up before the internet and also the the first generation to actually grow up with the internet
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that a transitional point and this is actually a question I've asked guests
[Amit Varma]: of my own age. I'm 48 now at the time of recording. And what I have noticed in my life is that
[Amit Varma]: I became an adult before the internet was there. So I was well into my 20s before the
[Amit Varma]: internet came. And it was interesting because I had to kind of learn about the world again,
[Amit Varma]: learn about myself again, you know, you just do that whole process from scratch, even something
[Amit Varma]: and it's a very clear demarcation and in my generation and also, you know, just in terms
[Amit Varma]: of earlier before the internet, you are restricted by communities of circumstance, whereas now
[Amit Varma]: we can form communities of choice. And in just so many ways, life is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: I want to hear from you what it was like, you know, growing up before the internet,
[Amit Varma]: because you can contrast it in a much better with in a sense growing up with it because
[Amit Varma]: it came when you were young enough. And, you know, earlier, when we were having lunch before
[Amit Varma]: this, we were speaking about the importance of finding that quiet it you don't have where
[Amit Varma]: you can just sit and, you know, not let sensations knock you from thing to thing. Tell me a bit
[Amit Varma]: about your growing up years before the internet, like, where were you born? Where did you grow
[Guest]: up?
[Guest]: First, I want to again, and I know I've said this to you outside of the podcast, but I
[Guest]: think like this is a milestone. I was as I think one of the markers of, you know, making
[Guest]: it for me was when I get called to the to this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: You're too kind. You've been on very good podcasts like Varun Duggirala, Karthik Narkarachan.
[Guest]: Amazing. No, but thank you for having me. Honestly, I'm really look, as I said, I think
[Guest]: another thing that I'm really looking forward to over here is, you know, learning something
[Guest]: about myself also, which I think like that's the every time I hear your podcast, as you
[Guest]: yourself said, I think you learn not just about the person, but something about yourself.
[Guest]: So where do I begin? So I was born in Karnal in Haryana. And my family, we were living
[Guest]: in Lucknow at that time. My father was a banker. My mother tells me about the time when we
[Guest]: were, you know, in Lucknow, we were not very well off. So she would always she has these,
[Guest]: you know, when you see three idiots and you have that scene of black and white scene where
[Guest]: you show people being, you know, not very well off. She kind of always talks about it
[Guest]: in that way that, you know, papa ke ka coat phat jata tha. So then there was a choice.
[Guest]: Should we get you an ice cream or should we get you should we get his coat repaired? So
[Guest]: that's that's the context that I have, you know, of of growing up at that time where
[Guest]: we were. There was a lot my father was doing to try and break out of his circumstance.
[Guest]: And that was visible to everybody in the family. But he was constantly I don't think I spent
[Guest]: time with my father, you know, growing up at all, you know, because he was constantly
[Guest]: just trying to make it. He was just constantly trying to get more money, get a better house,
[Guest]: get to a better life. And so, yeah, I don't, unfortunately, have too many memories of spending
[Guest]: any time with my father. So I was very much raised by my mother in that sense. And two
[Guest]: things started happening. Of course, I started, you know, finding a lot of love and empathy
[Guest]: for my mother for the sacrifices that she's done and kind of always wanting to grow up
[Guest]: to be the kind of the opposite kind of a man as my father because as like I would see my
[Guest]: mother doing it all alone, right? And my father just so much, you know, I just wish I knew
[Guest]: him more, which I still do right now. But yeah, that there was a lot of my early years,
[Guest]: you know, we from Lucknow, we went to Delhi, my father moved out, he was in Bangalore.
[Guest]: From there, we were there for about a year and a half. And then we went to the Middle
[Guest]: East, Dubai, in Delhi. You know, my memories of, I feel Amit, I've always somewhere been
[Guest]: like this outsider looking in. I was talking to Hitesh Kevalia, who's, you know, is a writer
[Guest]: and director, he's done Shubh Mangal Saavdhan, Zyada Saavdhan. He used this fantastic term
[Guest]: called border wale log. He said that, you know, kuch log hote hain, border wale log
[Guest]: hote hain, jo, jo, they're always on the borders, they're never like inside or outside. I feel
[Guest]: like as someone who, you know, grew up in a manner where I was definitely not, I won't
[Guest]: say I was, you know, quote unquote poor, but we're definitely not very well off. And, and
[Guest]: suddenly in Delhi, when lifestyle started improving, I was put into, for example, Rhein
[Guest]: International. And I remember my memories of that time has been just me feeling really
[Guest]: like, where am I fitting in here, you know, as somebody who was not, you know, as as rich
[Guest]: as any of the other people over there, the way they spoke the English that they had,
[Guest]: the clothes that they wore, the chocolates they would bring every day. And those are
[Guest]: my early memories of like growing up. And then we went to Dubai, where, you know, my,
[Guest]: again, upwardly mobile. So, you know, got a slightly better lifestyle. Again, I felt
[Guest]: at home when I was in a school over there called our own English high school, where
[Guest]: which was basically the one place where I think every middle class Indian kid over there
[Guest]: was put in. But there was a better school there, which called modern high school, where,
[Guest]: which was for the upper class, so to speak, where my parents ultimately put me. So my
[Guest]: parents had made this choice when I was in when I was in Delhi, my younger brother was
[Guest]: put in a place, put in not a very good school or a very rich school in that sense. And he
[Guest]: was put in a government school and I was put in Rhein International. And so when we went
[Guest]: to Dubai, they switched it and said, you know what, and now our younger son gets to go to
[Guest]: a better school and you know, Nikhil gets to go to our own. No offense to anybody from
[Guest]: our own. But eventually when I went into modern high, again, the same, I feel like so much
[Guest]: of my life was just trying to kind of figure out how, who, what are these people? And you
[Guest]: know, what is this? Where am I stand? Where do I stand with these people? Right? And for
[Guest]: me, again, I think I just took it in with my mother also constantly telling me as his
[Guest]: mother was raising me pretty much on our own, constantly telling me things like, you know,
[Guest]: you need to obviously do better. You need to get a certain amount of marks and you need
[Guest]: to make me proud. You need to go with every young boy is told, you know, you have to be
[Guest]: an engineer and do an MBA. All of those things were always there, you know, I was constantly
[Guest]: being told. So my ambition initially just became that I have to make my mother proud.
[Guest]: That is all I want to do in my life. And no matter what place I was in, no matter what
[Guest]: role I was in, I was always just overworking, you know, putting my everything into it just
[Guest]: to make sure that when I go back, my mother is just like seeing all the work that she's
[Guest]: done in raising me and my brother. She's proud of us. And in that, I think I just imbibed
[Guest]: a mindset of like, you know, work is everything, you know, making it is everything. Aspiration
[Guest]: is everything, which somehow started conflicting with I think who I was as a person, which
[Guest]: I've now realized many, many, many years later, which was a person who used to really like
[Guest]: writing, who used to really like art, who used to really like watching movies growing
[Guest]: up. And, you know, stories were my comfort zone as someone again, as I said, someone
[Guest]: who didn't really fit in or did not know where to fit in. I would always watch movies as
[Guest]: you know, in a way for me to feel less alone. I remember one of the, you know, many years
[Guest]: ago, I was just trying to teach and I'm sure we'll come to that. When I was teaching my
[Guest]: students, I used to always ask them, you know, tell me your story. And then one day when
[Guest]: they asked me, what's my story, and I'd always tell them to go deeper, deeper, deeper. And
[Guest]: then I said something very superficial. And then I started thinking like, you know, everyone
[Guest]: I asked them to go deep, but what is my and then one of the and why do I do what I do?
[Guest]: And I was in Yash Raj films at that time, I was, you know, filmmaker. And the deeper
[Guest]: that I went, I kind of recognized this one thing, which came to me as an epiphany that,
[Guest]: you know, one of the reasons why I even interested in stories was because so my father was a
[Guest]: big Dev Anand fan. And the only time that my father would ever call me was when he put
[Guest]: on would come home and put on a Dev Anand movie. And then he'd be like, do you want
[Guest]: to watch it? And then I would sit with him and I would watch these movies. That's what
[Guest]: I remember growing up. And I suppose, in that moment with my father, I started recognizing
[Guest]: the power of stories and storytelling and the fact that, you know, they actually bring
[Guest]: you together in some way or the other. And that's my connection that I made with stories.
[Guest]: You know, the only time I would ever have with my father was because of movies, because,
[Guest]: you know, we got to sit together and spend three hours while we didn't may not have spoken.
[Guest]: My father would be very excited about the facts of that film. And that's all I know,
[Guest]: but he would never talk about me about feelings and emotions. But like, well, Dev Anand has
[Guest]: done these many films and Adi Varman has done this and Kishore Kumar has done this and you
[Guest]: know, but I was getting to spend time with my father, which meant a lot to me. But and
[Guest]: that was my life. And I started really falling in love with the written word with stories
[Guest]: started writing when I was very young, when I was about 14. And, and that's where the
[Guest]: internet came into my life. So from Dubai, we went to Bahrain. And there was a magazine
[Guest]: in the Middle East called Young Times, which was a part of the Khaleesh Times group over
[Guest]: there. And Young Times was for young writers. And they used to have an arts column in it
[Guest]: where people used to make paintings and drawings and send them. So my brother was a natural
[Guest]: artist, you know, so he would draw these beautiful, you know, drawings and whatnot and send them
[Guest]: and they'd get published. And I would constantly also try to do the same, but they would never
[Guest]: publish my story. And I mean, my drawings are used to get so irritated, you know, like,
[Guest]: and I was very bad at it. And I would also then, you know, use like a transparent paper
[Guest]: and copy, you know, a drawing and I clearly they found out that I'm actually it's a plagiarism,
[Guest]: which I now understand. But, but you know, I was just getting so frustrated that my brother
[Guest]: keeps getting published. I don't keep getting published. I've sent far more entries than
[Guest]: my brother. So one day I wrote a letter to them, you know, saying that, you know, like,
[Guest]: I have a grievance with you all, you know, as a 12, 13, 14 year old, you, you know, I've
[Guest]: sent so many different, you know, entries and you never publish it. And they publish
[Guest]: that letter. And then I was like, well, clearly there's something in my writing that they
[Guest]: wanted to publish. So, so I started writing more letters to them and they started publishing
[Guest]: those letters. And eventually, because it was a youth magazine, I kind of, and because
[Guest]: we had access to the internet, they just had like this email ID. We had got our first computer
[Guest]: at that time. This is when I was 13. And, and we just got an internet dial up internet
[Guest]: connection. So I just, I don't know why, but again, sense of ambition, constantly wanting
[Guest]: to do better. I was like, what if I asked these folks that, uh, what if I could do something
[Guest]: in Bahrain as a young writer? Can I be their correspondent? Can I, you know, because there's
[Guest]: a lot of Indian celebrities to come to Bahrain. I was like, what if I interview them? And
[Guest]: I don't even know where these ideas are. I didn't even know where these ideas came from,
[Guest]: but I was just, I gave it a shot because of the internet and the road back saying, yes,
[Guest]: go for it. And I said, what? And, and that's where my writing career pretty much began
[Guest]: at, at 13, 14, you know, I got published. I've, I interviewed like from Junoon to, you
[Guest]: know, Shankar Mahadevan to, you know, to Michael Schumacher. I have interviewed all of them
[Guest]: before I was 18 during school years. And actually like spending time with those folks, Mohan
[Guest]: Lal, I've sat with him. And the internet was the way for me to get to know these people.
[Guest]: To know them as well. I just do intense research on everybody. So when I'd go there, you know,
[Guest]: because I was like, age is against me in that sense, they'd be like, Oh, who's this 13,
[Guest]: 14 year old coming? But like my, I need to make sure that when I ask questions, nobody,
[Guest]: you know, looks down on me. So I just research the hell out of everybody and then go into
[Guest]: that and, and start asking these questions. So before the internet, I feel like I kind
[Guest]: of did not, as I think, did not know where to fit in. And when the internet happened,
[Guest]: I suddenly kind of found my voice, you know, as somebody who just in the offline world,
[Guest]: because of a certain, I don't know, class hierarchy, a social hierarchy, I was just
[Guest]: always lost, always trying to find, you know, companionship, or true friendship, or authentic
[Guest]: relationships, which I was just not able to as a young boy. And, and which is where movies
[Guest]: became important to me. I think because of the internet, then I started finding like,
[Guest]: a reason or an entire world on the internet. That was meant for me that was like, this
[Guest]: is my community, this is going to be my world. This is where I fit in.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's very resonant and many things I want to double click on. But first I was
[Amit Varma]: you just before you told me that you were born in Karnal, I thought of Karnal during
[Amit Varma]: lunch. And the reason is that I was born in Chandigarh. But so I kind of know Karnal from
[Amit Varma]: a distance. But the reason is that you were talking about the film you're kind of working
[Amit Varma]: on, you're talking about one of your projects. And a project that I once abandoned came to
[Amit Varma]: mind, which was about 12-13 years ago, I decided that I'm going to write the series of three
[Amit Varma]: really bad pulpy novels, much like Roger Corman films, you know, that kind of feel. And I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to write each of them in one week. So it's going to be really hurried and bad. And
[Amit Varma]: one of those was called Karnal in Karnal. And it was about this bunch of boys, bunch
[Amit Varma]: of guys who want to have a party in this farmhouse in Karnal. And they get a bunch of sex workers
[Amit Varma]: or a bunch of girls to have it with. And then it quickly becomes a horror film, as these
[Amit Varma]: women turn on them and eventually murder all of them. And, you know, so it was very gory
[Amit Varma]: and very whatever I never ended up doing this, because, you know, one thinks of a million
[Amit Varma]: projects and all that. But, you know, now when you mentioned Karnal, for some reason,
[Amit Varma]: I thought of that. And it's again, women striking back against a patriarchy, right? There's
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of oppression you're hitting at, which is also the theme of so much of
[Amit Varma]: your work. The first of the things I want to double click on is your what you told me
[Amit Varma]: the memories you shared with your mother, and even your father, like I did this recent
[Amit Varma]: episode with Samarth Bansal, you know, very beautiful, deep conversation and where he
[Amit Varma]: spoke about the expectations he had from his mother. And, you know, he spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: the day he got his first job, she said that I feel like I have become independent. Because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and, and it was very interesting. And I'm interested in not just that aspect
[Amit Varma]: of it, but that aspect that in the sense, when we grow up, we often don't think of our
[Amit Varma]: parents a way we would do later, right? They are playing roles, we are also playing a role,
[Amit Varma]: they are playing roles, they are stuck in that role. We take them for granted. For us,
[Amit Varma]: a mother is a particular role that is being played by someone, a father is a particular
[Amit Varma]: role. We don't even think of them as real people. You know, recently, my father passed
[Amit Varma]: last year. So I was looking through old photographs. And I came across a photograph of my parents
[Amit Varma]: when they were in their early 40s. Right? And it's, it's like, a huge sort of mental
[Amit Varma]: shift you have to make. Because in that photograph, they're younger than I am now. And they're
[Amit Varma]: actual, they look like actual real people. And at the same time, I have a memory of them
[Amit Varma]: as that little boy in the picture, you know, looking at them as people who are in these
[Amit Varma]: roles, you never really see them as people. And later on, when you you know, you go through
[Amit Varma]: life, you look back, you kind of understand a little bit more, I think some people may
[Amit Varma]: go through their whole lives, just playing out roles, never seeing never understanding
[Amit Varma]: that my mother is someone who might have felt restrained by her circumstances that God knows
[Amit Varma]: what kind of quiet grief she hid within her as she did as she played her roles, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and ditto for fathers, as you've pointed out, you know, both men and women in different
[Amit Varma]: ways are victims of patriarchy. But I want to ask about sort of this memory aspect that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, were you clear as a kid at what was happening? Or is this stuff you're beginning
[Amit Varma]: to figure out in hindsight? And how do you look back on them and post all of that? You
[Amit Varma]: know, how did your how did your relationship with them evolve? Like, is this stuff that
[Guest]: you can talk about now at a distance?
[Guest]: Absolutely. When I was much younger, I obviously did not have an understanding or perspective
[Guest]: of the roles my parents were playing. I just had a lot of love for my mother, because I
[Guest]: would see how hard she tries. And not just because of me, and I don't want to I don't
[Guest]: want to dive too deeply into this part of my life, because it's about my brother. And
[Guest]: I don't think I'm the right person to talk about his life. But my brother went through
[Guest]: a really long phase of mental health issues, and younger brother, so just really like a
[Guest]: 10 year period where he was depressed. And my mother's worked day and night to, you know,
[Guest]: help him. You know, even even when you were in Dubai Bahrain, you know, again, we were
[Guest]: not now I think we're in a place where we can easily say that we have privilege. But,
[Guest]: you know, we were, we didn't have enough money to travel through taxi. So my mother would
[Guest]: enroll us in every, you know, extracurricular activity possible. And then just walk us there,
[Guest]: you know, like, so we like 40-45 minutes in the 45-50 degree heat, we would be walking
[Guest]: from after school from our home to like, you know, tuition that she wanted us to be at
[Guest]: a karate class, a tennis class, a swimming lesson, which most of which we gave up on
[Guest]: you're like terrible kids in that sense, you know, but I was very aware that there is an
[Guest]: effort going into, you know, raising us and, and, and that became even more apparent when
[Guest]: my brother started going through his issues. And my mother really like just her entire
[Guest]: life became about making sure my brother is, you know, able to get out of it. We did not
[Guest]: know at that time it was depression. You know, at that time, we thought that there was, it
[Guest]: was just, I mean, he's some problem as a child, he's not a problematic child in some way.
[Guest]: And much later, we found out that this is mental health related, because those terms
[Guest]: did not exist then, you know, so, so, so yeah, I think growing up and then my I was also
[Guest]: very close to my Maasi, you know, who was like this ray of light who would come like
[Guest]: again, she's a teacher, she has had a very hard life, she lost her husband, lost her
[Guest]: parents, single handedly, like took care of her parents after losing her husband very
[Guest]: early, lost her brother, both my mother, they've lost his elder brother. And she would just
[Guest]: come in and you know, give us like this. So these gifts she'll bring in, you know, just
[Guest]: a lot of love, a lot of, you know, care every time she'd come in to meet us. And these two
[Guest]: women I would, and my Maasi was someone who would, you know, teach at a school. So she
[Guest]: was a teacher, English teacher at a convent school in Karnal. And one of the most respected
[Guest]: women in Karnal, even today, like sometimes you go for holidays, and you meet a student
[Guest]: of hers who comes in, ma'am, you've, you've changed my life and whatnot. It's so beautiful
[Guest]: to see. So these two strong women, you know, who are doing everything that was that was
[Guest]: my understanding, like, you know, of of my parents in that sense, or my elders. On the
[Guest]: other hand, with my father, it was mostly resentment. I was just really angry with him
[Guest]: that he was not there for me. I'd see some of my other friends, you know, playing cricket
[Guest]: with their fathers, etc, etc, or hanging out with them, you know, my father had no time
[Guest]: for us. And, and my father also went through his own issues, used to be very angry, which
[Guest]: I feel like most fathers are, I suppose, now that I've found or now that I've spoken to
[Guest]: hundreds of 1000s of kids in India, I think that's the pattern, father is equal to angry.
[Guest]: But what he would also go through something which I much later realized was anxiety. So
[Guest]: he was his he would his again, I feel he would there's a sense of violence, but that was
[Guest]: to himself versus that anger was taken out on us as well. But never as much as on himself,
[Guest]: you know, if I can put it as nicely as possible. So I just did not really like I was just angry
[Guest]: with my father, you know, like I think all young men in our country are. And I wanted to be
[Guest]: the kind of husband. I mean, everything my father's like, I was always like, here's my
[Guest]: profile of my father, I'm going to be absolute opposite of him in every possible way. I'm
[Guest]: going to be the best husband, I'm going to be the best son, I'm going to be the best,
[Guest]: you know, brother, I'm going to be the best, you know, caretaker of a home, I'm going to,
[Unknown]: you know, I mean, I'm never going to go into banking, which he was the absolute opposite
[Guest]: of banking. I was like, I'm not going to be a banker. So if he's outside of India, I'll
[Guest]: go back to India. You know, I'm everything for me was just like, I'm not going to be
[Guest]: him. And, and, and again, let me let me point out this that he was never in fact, he was
[Guest]: never unkind to me. You know, in that sense, like he was, he was not again, with my mother,
[Guest]: he was I think he was just as patriarchal as every Indian man is, let me put it that
[Guest]: way, you know, which used to get me even angrier, because I'd be like, why are you, you raise
[Guest]: us, you do all this work in home, why do you still have to like, work for him? You're not
[Guest]: you don't have to work for him. You can you work for the you're working for your home.
[Guest]: I get it, but you have to work for him as well. But, but he was, you know, while and
[Guest]: and for for whatever it's worth, he's never like, while he's been angry at us, and he's
[Guest]: might have raised his hands at me and my brother, but he's never like, you know, with my mother,
[Guest]: he's never really been violent in a domestic violence way, you know, and, but he as I said,
[Guest]: he just had a lot of, you know, anxiety issues, which I much later found out and and seeing
[Guest]: him, I had a sense of, you know, and I feel very now that I look back, I feel really bad
[Guest]: about that I used to have a sense of a weak man. It's not a very strong man, you know,
[Guest]: whereas I feel like it does take a lot of strength for him to break out of the family
[Guest]: that he came from, you know, and go on to his whole family, you know, nobody else has
[Guest]: been, so to speak successful in his family, you know, he was from Panipat and his parents
[Guest]: and I mean, both our parents are from, you know, what is now Pakistan, Punjab in Pakistan,
[Guest]: you know, crossed over, grandparents crossed over, one settled in, you know, Karnal eventually
[Guest]: and one settled in Panipat eventually. And, but he broke out of his, you know, he and
[Guest]: he did it on his own. There was no support system. He did like the, you know, the clerk
[Guest]: exam or, you know, whichever the banking exam is, and then rose his ranks. And now he is,
[Guest]: you know, chairman at ICC in Bahrain. And, you know, he's spoken at United Nations on
[Guest]: him. He's one of the biggest names in trade finance, even though he's still like thinks
[Guest]: he's nothing, you know, but it has, it's been very, I mean, much later, I've looked back
[Guest]: and thought that, you know, I mean, he was much stronger man without the support system.
[Guest]: You know, my, my mother was the biggest support system, but he'd grown up without a system
[Guest]: which, which then made him so angry at his own life, that all the things that he would
[Guest]: do or, you know, he just didn't have the emotional quotient that my mother had. And I, earlier
[Guest]: I used to blame him for him for it. And then after a lot of therapy, I realized that, you
[Guest]: know, it's not his fault either, is it? So growing up, I had very, you know, clear rules
[Guest]: of, you know, what my mother's supposed to, my mother is what my father is. But much later
[Guest]: in life, I have, I was very angry with my father for many, many, many, many years. Now
[Guest]: I'm not, now I empathize, now I understand, now I feel bad for the way that I've treated
[Guest]: him as a son, even though, you know, I'm still angry at the way he treated my mother. But
[Guest]: at the same time, I recognize it's not, it's, it's conditioning. And it's, you know, he
[Guest]: had anxiety, he had conditioning, he tried so hard to, he's the reason why I have whatever
[Guest]: privilege I have today. He's the reason why our family has whatever privilege we have
[Guest]: today. That, you know, and we were good children. And that's a, let me be honest, like my brother
[Guest]: and I, we never, you know, we recognize that our parents have worked hard to get their
[Guest]: money. We've never spent up like, never, we didn't even ask for a gift on our birthdays.
[Guest]: We were just happy, like being with each other, you know, and, and it's only like in my 30s,
[Guest]: my father has started gifting me things, which has been like a, like, okay, what do I do
[Guest]: with this now? I have an iPad. Thank you. But, but, you know, so yeah, I just, I just,
[Guest]: and on the other hand, when I, my anger with my father also translated to anger with my
[Guest]: mother during my 20s, because, because she wanted me to again, break out of our circumstances
[Guest]: in some way, she just put a lot of pressure on me, which again, I don't begrudge her for
[Guest]: anymore. But at that time, it just, it drove me into a certain kind of, again, depression,
[Guest]: if I can say so, where I was trying after my, I mean, I'm sure we'll get into that.
[Guest]: But I did after, even though I was someone who was writing such, such an early age, you
[Guest]: know, I remember this very distinct conversation, which is not even a conversation that my parents
[Guest]: would remember. But we were at our first ever family holiday in life, you know, so after
[Guest]: I finished 12th, my father took us for this SOTC Europe tour, you know, and there was,
[Guest]: and my father is always this person, which I'm saying he's always also been like, anytime
[Guest]: I had interviews, he'd drive me to those interviews. So he's also been like, I always looked at
[Guest]: him in such such a sharply negative point of view that I could never see the efforts
[Guest]: he made in different ways. But I remember like, again, my father showing off to everyone
[Guest]: saying my son has written in these magazines, he's interviewed these people, look at this,
[Guest]: look at that, he was 17 at that time. And there's this old couple that he was talking
[Guest]: to, and the couple said, that sounds so fantastic. So is he going to now, I was in 12th, right?
[Guest]: Is he going to an arts college? Is he, are you putting him in like Delhi in like something
[Guest]: interesting? And my mother immediately said, no, no, that's a hobby. You know, that's not
[Guest]: what he will do. He will, you know, be an engineer. And, and he's going to, you know,
[Guest]: and do MBA. And, you know, and I was, it wasn't like, it's such a distinct memory for me.
[Guest]: And much later, I remember that it's still something that hits me that I just never had
[Guest]: an opinion or a decision in what I was ever going to do. It was just decided for me, right?
[Guest]: Ki yehi karega. Aur maine bhi uss time socha nahi, main ka, main bhi maan gaya tha, yehi
[Guest]: karna hai. I am going to be an engineer, you know. But I mean, I was this, whatever, bright
[Guest]: kid who used to love writing. And I wish somebody had pointed me in the direction and said,
[Guest]: you know what, do this. But I had to find a different path. I had to finish engineering.
[Guest]: Then I had to leave. I mean, like after that, I got jobs. Told my parents, dekho main, I'm
[Guest]: capable of getting jobs. After that, I came to Bombay and then started working with Hindustan
[Guest]: Times at a very, you know, like a terrible, terrible salary for like two, two and a half
[Guest]: years. Even during that time, my mother would keep telling me and she would say it in the,
[Guest]: again, from a place of, you know, you're not earning money, you should really like do something
[Guest]: where you're going to be comfortable. But for me, it was always like, you know, have
[Guest]: some faith in me. I know there's no money right now, but I'm trying to do something
[Guest]: of my own. You're the one person who's always given me love. Why can't you today show me
[Guest]: that love and that trust and that support and, and, and just let me be. And that just
[Guest]: drove like a wedge into our relationship. So for a very long time, you know, I kind
[Guest]: of have this thing where I feel like when you are younger, your parents are always forgiving
[Guest]: you for like being an idiot. You know, in the middle, there's a time when you grew up
[Guest]: and your parents stop forgiving you because you're like, now you can't be needed because
[Guest]: you are, you know, not young anymore. But because your parents have always had a certain
[Guest]: way of behaving with you, you start, you know, also getting angry. You've always like, why
[Guest]: not now? I'm so what I'm still your child or whatever. You still say I'm a child, but
[Guest]: why are you getting angry? So you also get angry back, right? And then you kind of get
[Guest]: older and then you become the opposite. You become a parent in that sense to your parents
[Guest]: where you're just like, yeah, they're old and they don't get it as much as we do now.
[Guest]: We need to start forgiving, right? And that's what I think happened after in my thirties
[Guest]: where I've just like, let it all go. And I've really, you know, try to listen to my parents,
[Guest]: try to understand them. As you very nicely said, I've tried to look at them not as parents,
[Guest]: but as human beings and just really felt bad for the way that I was just so angry in my
[Guest]: twenties with them. I mean, we still, my mother is still very hurt about the way that I talk
[Guest]: about these years because she obviously has done her best to be a fantastic mother, even
[Guest]: though it ended up pressurizing me and driving me into a sense of like real despair that
[Guest]: my mother doesn't believe in me, you know, but I can now keep telling her that it's okay,
[Guest]: you know, it's not your fault as well. And you need to be comfortable with that, you
[Guest]: know, that there was a period that maybe both of us, I mean, all of us are victims of patriarchy
[Guest]: and none of us knows any better. You know, you can get angry with your parents as much
[Guest]: as you want, but they've been conditioned to behave in the same way from their parents
[Guest]: and so on and so forth. You know, everybody has come from the societal conditioning. And
[Guest]: if you are aware today, you need to have the empathy and it's empathy is not easy. It is
[Guest]: a responsibility. It is, it's tough. It's a burden sometimes, but if you don't have
[Guest]: it, then you know, you're never going to have, you're never going to go beyond anger into
[Guest]: love, into compassion, into togetherness, you know. So I'm just, I'm really glad that
[Guest]: now I see my parents differently. And I'm just a lot more grateful for what they've
[Guest]: given me. My father for the long hours, you know, where he just, when I think about it
[Guest]: right now, I mean, he never got to hang with his son. I, I've always felt like he didn't,
[Guest]: my father didn't hang with me. But now I also feel like, well, he as a person, as a human
[Guest]: being, as a man did not get to hang out with his son. You know, my mother, I would always
[Guest]: be like, she always wanted me to be this way. And now I'm, I'm looking at it in a different
[Guest]: way that she wanted some, she expected something from her son, which her son was pushing back
[Guest]: on. So, so even their anger was valid or, you know, their efforts were valid, you know,
[Guest]: in whatever they were doing. So, yeah, I feel a little, I feel like a tinge of regret in
[Guest]: the way that I was in my 20s. But I recognize that, you know, obviously, this is just the
[Guest]: way life is. And we got to do better now.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lovely anecdote in one of your columns about when you're getting married and you're
[Amit Varma]: having this destination wedding in Simla, and your mother is, you know, arguing with
[Amit Varma]: you about some little thing. And you're like, come on, it's my marriage. Why are you arguing
[Amit Varma]: now? And tell me about that. And what I'm also interested in is that you were able to
[Amit Varma]: after a period of time, shrug off that layer where, you know, they're human beings for
[Amit Varma]: you, they're not playing a role anymore. So you can see them in that new light and can
[Amit Varma]: evaluate them in that new light. Were they able to shrug off those layers, not just with
[Amit Varma]: regard to you, but perhaps with regard to yourself? Like, are these conversations, like,
[Amit Varma]: everything that we've been talking about, is this a conversation you could have with
[Amit Varma]: both of them sitting there sitting across somewhere?
[Guest]: Great question. With my father, not so much. Because my father, he's still like, you know,
[Guest]: I don't know if he'll ever hear this. He totally hears most of the things I do. So I'm also
[Guest]: now a little worried that he's going to hear this. But, you know, I'd love to have a conversation
[Guest]: with my father someday, you know, and I want to, I want to just have an honest conversation
[Guest]: with him, just get to know him better. Now, the thing about him, he also talks a lot.
[Guest]: OK, so he's also someone who's very absent minded in how much he speaks. So he speaks
[Guest]: a lot about his life anyway, but not in a meaningful way. Right. So I may know, I know
[Guest]: every story of his life a hundred times over, because that's anytime he meets anybody at
[Guest]: any party, he will repeat those stories. At the same time, I just feel like there's nothing
[Guest]: I know beyond the surface of these stories. So I'd love to have like a meaningful conversation
[Guest]: with my father someday where, you know, we can be friends and we can talk about each
[Guest]: other. But, you know, I just feel like he never matured into the EQ that you should
[Guest]: have to be able to have a compassionate conversation with someone you love, someone who loves you.
[Guest]: So he just has just been, distance has been his, and I feel like that's true for all fathers,
[Guest]: right? Distance becomes their thing. I don't know what to say, but that's what they're,
[Guest]: that's the way of life, you know, being distant from each other. You work, I have to work
[Guest]: on my thing, you work on your thing. And every once in a while we will call each other and
[Guest]: then I will hand the phone to your mother, which is, you know, like every time my father
[Guest]: calls me, the first reaction is I get scared. Like, why is my father calling me? Kuch ho
[Guest]: toh nahi hain, you know, dar la jata hai mujhe. And if he calls me and he's just like, how
[Guest]: are you? I'm like, why? Like, what happened? That's my question. I don't like, I'm fine.
[Guest]: What? I'm like, what happened? You know, that thing he might sometimes just, so I, I've
[Guest]: still had that place with my father now after retirement has also wanted to like, give me
[Guest]: a hug. And I'm just like, what? When do you want hugs? When he gives me a hug, when I
[Guest]: give him a hug, even with somebody who kind of now talks a lot about things like empathy,
[Guest]: I get so uncomfortable. I don't know, you know, when my father gives me a hug, I'm still
[Guest]: like, I don't know what to do about it. I'm just like closed. I'm like, this is weird.
[Guest]: This is not natural. Even though it should be the most natural thing ever, right? For
[Guest]: a child to be hugged by their parent. So I feel bad about that. I want, I would love
[Guest]: to change that. I don't know how to, I'm still struggling with it. On the other hand, with
[Guest]: my mother, I'm really fortunate that, you know, we have gone through every cycle of
[Guest]: our relationship where we've gotten really angry with each other. I stopped talking to
[Guest]: her almost for a year in between. And I was so angry with her not supporting me and not
[Guest]: seeing me go down a path where I was very, and despaired that she wanted me to do an
[Guest]: MBA. I remember like, this one time when I was at MTV, I had, my show was announced at
[Guest]: 25. I had become the creator and producer, the youngest creator and producer at MTV to
[Guest]: create a fiction show. I was going to be given that those credits, you know, and for anybody
[Guest]: who's 25 to get that was just an insane thing in India, you know, and I called my mother
[Guest]: and I said, you know what, they've announced my show. I'm only producing it. I'm also going
[Guest]: to be credited as created by, you know, and she heard me out and she's just like, I can't
[Guest]: forget that. She's just like, that's so good to hear. That's so great to hear. Does that,
[Guest]: but does that mean you will not do an MBA? And I'm like, I just told you that at 25,
[Guest]: I am going to be making a show of my own on national television. And your thing is still
[Guest]: stuck on. But I mean, that's parents, right? Like, and because that's the only way that
[Guest]: she knows that people become successful, because that's the only she's, she just didn't have,
[Guest]: you know, she didn't have the internet to begin with. And she did not have, you know,
[Guest]: enough resources would tell her that, you know, there are possibilities outside of engineering
[Guest]: and MBA for a young man to be able to still find his voice and his career and make it.
[Guest]: And until I joined Yashraj, I remember like the, for me, the, my greatest moment in life
[Guest]: so to speak is when my mother came to Bombay and I started working in Yashraj and I had
[Guest]: done pretty well over there. So I'd gotten a cabin and I'd been promoted to GM. So I'd
[Guest]: got a double promotion, got, became GM at YRF and my mother had come down to Bombay.
[Guest]: So I just asked her to come to the Yashraj office. I took her through, I showed her around
[Guest]: the whole Yashraj campus, took her then to my floor, you know, got her to come to my
[Guest]: cabin and said, this is my cabin. And then she entered and I got her to sit down to a
[Guest]: picture with it. I'm like, are you feeling happy now? And she said, yes, I'm feeling
[Guest]: very happy. And then I was like, okay, now it's like achieved, tick mark, you know, just
[Guest]: the fact that my mother is now finally like happy with where I am in life. But at that
[Guest]: time it was tough, you know, but we went through a lot, you know, we, we, you know, and, and
[Guest]: I mean, that was how that happened in the marriage, which is a whole other thing that
[Guest]: has happened, you know, we, there was a lot of misunderstanding between me and my mother
[Guest]: and I, you know, and, but eventually I just started. And again, I think anxiety and therapy
[Guest]: have been like God given gifts to me where I could tap into, you know, a lot more of
[Guest]: my, you know, empathy or my emotions to be able to look at my family in different lights,
[Guest]: you know, and go beyond the anger, you know, and over the last six, seven years, I have
[Guest]: had such a beautiful, friendly relation with my mother. She's my closest, one of my closest
[Guest]: friends, I would say, if not my closest friend, my wife is my closest friend. If she hears
[Guest]: that I said something, otherwise she'll get angry.
[Amit Varma]: You're getting into trouble with both people.
[Guest]: Tough, tough line, but, but she's, you know, and to her credit, she has tried so hard to
[Guest]: kind of be a friend to us. And I've not seen other people of her age or of her generation
[Guest]: try that hard. She has tried so hard. I am so inspired. And I, I look up to her so much.
[Guest]: She has done everything. She realized that her relationship with both her children was
[Guest]: getting stuck at a place. We were not, wasn't going beyond that. And she did everything.
[Guest]: She said, tell me what I have to do. And she did it. She's like, you know, I mean, all,
[Guest]: all parents, I feel after a certain point, you know, because of the patriarchal conditioning
[Guest]: and everything, they have these certain, you know, whether they're homophobic, Islamophobic,
[Guest]: all of these, you know, issues, just conditioned into them. She's gone beyond them. She's like
[Guest]: tried when you would tell her that this is wrong, she would hear it. We'll say that,
[Guest]: you know, this is misogynist. She will fight back a little bit, but then she would be like,
[Guest]: okay, explain why. And she's heard it. And she's been, she's, I mean, it's incredible
[Guest]: the way she has carried herself, the grace, the, she's the light of my life. I'll be very
[Guest]: honest. She's like, you know, I'm my biggest fear in life, honestly, is that I don't know
[Guest]: who I'll be when she's gone. I just don't know. I don't know. Like she's, she's really
[Guest]: carried the family. She's carried, you know, yeah, she's even with all the pressure she
[Guest]: put on me, I can't, you know, I can't, I'm just far more grateful about the kind of values
[Guest]: she's inculcated in me. There are still a lot of things in me that I, I do get angry
[Guest]: that, you know, it came from mother, but like, it's, you know, she's done everything to,
[Guest]: you know, compensate for any time she has not been, you know, kind to us or not been
[Guest]: like understanding or a good friend and just a parent in that sense. So, yeah, I'm, you
[Guest]: know, as I said, in that, during my wedding, like, it was one of those things where, you
[Guest]: know, we had many things happen, but like, long story short, we had reached that place
[Guest]: where my parents and my wife's parents were just at loggerhead, so to speak, because they're
[Guest]: from Assam, we're from the Punjabis, just ridiculous things started coming up, you know,
[Guest]: like, why are we having this in the, they wanted to do it in the daytime, because that's
[Guest]: how they do it, and we want to do it in the night time, because that's how we do it, you
[Guest]: know, they wanted non-veg, my parents were like, suddenly, my mother, who's been, while
[Guest]: my family is now vegetarian and whatnot, but my mother, who would encourage my younger
[Guest]: brother to eat chicken, because it gives strength, even though I'm not going to eat it, suddenly
[Guest]: I was like, no, we will never have non-veg on our wedding, like, what is this, like ridiculous
[Guest]: things, so, you know, and I remember, like, things came to such a head that I was just
[Guest]: again getting really, like, I was very frustrated in my wedding, because I feel like I was,
[Guest]: I was getting myself married, like, because my parents anyway live, they don't live in
[Guest]: the country, so I was just very, again, just my father is just, doesn't know what to do,
[Guest]: he's just like a tourist to my marriage, he's come as a guest, no idea, what's happening,
[Guest]: what's not happening, the whole wedding, the whole location, I got everything done, my
[Guest]: mother's tried her best, but she also doesn't live in India, beyond a point, what can she
[Guest]: do, so I was also very, I was like, I'm getting married now, you need to just, you know, I
[Guest]: know that you have more sense and more love than this, you've been a good mother to me,
[Guest]: why are you making such a big thing out of such a small stupid thing, and then she said
[Guest]: during that time, the first time I think we've had an honest conversation, where she told
[Guest]: me that, you know, you've always done what you wanted, you've always, and I didn't say
[Guest]: anything, which is lies, she told me lots of things, but she's like, you finish engineering
[Guest]: and then you decide to go to Hindustan Times, you've said that you're gonna marry a Punjabi
[Guest]: girl and then you went and married an Aziz girl, you said you'll not do media, you did
[Guest]: that, everything has been like against what we wanted, but we didn't say anything, but
[Guest]: like this is the, and then she said this thing that, you know, again, just has remained in
[Guest]: my head where she said that, you know, but when it comes to the marriage, right, that's
[Guest]: the last time your parents get to have a say in your life, after that it's your life, after
[Guest]: that where will we come, you know, but this is the thing that we get to do, and this is
[Guest]: the last thing we get to do, so, you know, if you're not letting us do this, then like,
[Guest]: you know, I just feel like I don't have a stake in your life, and I don't know what
[Guest]: to do as a mother, and I just, that honest thing that happened, and I was just like,
[Guest]: man, if you had said this earlier, all this wouldn't have happened, so I just said, we
[Guest]: will do what you want, and then we did everything, I mean, we did everything, we said like what
[Guest]: functions do you want, I convinced her parents, I just made sure, we did like three versions
[Guest]: of the marriage, we went to Assam to kind of, you know, to be with Daisy's parents and appease
[Guest]: her family, went to Bahrain again, did a whole function for my family, in the wedding, we
[Guest]: said what all we have to do, we will do everything, you just, you know, you want to do this, we
[Guest]: will do it your way, you know, don't feel like, it means so much to me, everything that
[Guest]: you have done for me, so, that is the moment I think where I started looking at her not
[Guest]: as my mother, but like as a human being, and I feel like that's one of the first times
[Guest]: that I realized that, you know, where I have been, you know, I just realized that, you
[Guest]: know, this person's son is getting married, you know, my mother's son is getting married,
[Guest]: and she should also have a stake in that, right?
[Guest]: Why am I making such a big deal out of it?
[Guest]: So yeah, I think it's been a journey to understanding my parents, but I'm, yeah, I'm more grateful
[Guest]: than, you know, regretful of the things that have happened so far.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was very struck by that, that beautiful story of that conversation and similar because
[Amit Varma]: it is a rare moment of honesty that, you know, people can't often see themselves so well
[Amit Varma]: as she saw herself in that moment and was able to express, you know, one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: phrases in literature, which I think expresses a human condition so well is Thoreau's phrase,
[Amit Varma]: lives of quiet desperation, right, and I think most people definitely so in all the generations
[Amit Varma]: before us, live lives of quiet desperation.
[Amit Varma]: And I think part of that desperation doesn't necessarily come from things like monetary
[Amit Varma]: circumstances or all those other things.
[Amit Varma]: It comes from just being trapped in a groove that this is a groove that has been laid out
[Unknown]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the man has to be the owner, he has to be the stern man, he cannot show emotion,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of that and the mother's got a different role and everything you said about
[Amit Varma]: your parents was so resonant with me, I can, you know, recognize all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And in general, the great human tragedy has been that the illusion never lifts, the layers
[Amit Varma]: never go, which is why I was interested if you, you know, managed to speak about them
[Amit Varma]: later about all of this, because I think most of us who get on these grooves and live out
[Amit Varma]: that quiet desperation, we can't express it, we can't acknowledge it even to ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And we are passing it on.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of my favorite poems by Philip Larkin has these great lines, man hands on misery
[Amit Varma]: to man, it deepens like a coastal shelf.
[Amit Varma]: And that's such a lovely poetic image, it deepens like a coastal shelf, right.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the poem is trying to convince people not to have children.
[Amit Varma]: For just this reason, man hands on misery to man, it deepens like a coastal shelf.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that you've written eloquently about is firstly, these traps of
[Amit Varma]: getting trapped in these roles.
[Amit Varma]: And also the fact that this might be the one generation, you know, especially Gen Z digital
[Amit Varma]: natives exposed to the world growing up on the internet, who have access to other truths,
[Amit Varma]: who don't have to, you know, follow these lanes that are laid out for them by patriarchy
[Amit Varma]: or by conservative Indian society or any of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken about this a lot, and I'll put all those links in the show notes also.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd also like you to talk about how your realization of this evolved about these strict
[Amit Varma]: roles, these lanes that are laid out, tell me a little bit about how your realization
[Amit Varma]: of this evolved and then going through time, you know, like, because once you realize it,
[Amit Varma]: you can't unsee it, you know, it's absolutely, it's never unseen again.
[Amit Varma]: And you will see it in every face that you look into, you will see it, right, you will,
[Amit Varma]: you will hear it in their stories.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that journey for you and what Yeah, you know, so I think, again,
[Guest]: you know, I saw all of it at home without registering, you know, that this is, I just
[Guest]: knew that this is wrong, my mother shouldn't be constantly, you know, in the service of
[Guest]: my father.
[Guest]: She should.
[Guest]: My mother used to be a professor of economics, even she had an MA in economics at Kurukshetra
[Guest]: University, and then she had taught it to students over there when she was 23, 24.
[Guest]: She's a wonderful painter.
[Guest]: She's I mean, she's one of the smartest I'm telling you, she's like, it's insane how multifaceted
[Guest]: she is.
[Guest]: You know, tell her anything and she'll do it, you know, I remember this one moment,
[Guest]: you know, where we were at this really random place called workshop called born to excel,
[Guest]: where these folks had come to kind of give young people how to the methods of excelling
[Guest]: or whatever is a summer course that you are getting enrolled in.
[Guest]: And you know, the first time he asked the question, the man over the workshop, and he
[Guest]: was like, Well, I have a question that if there is a let's see which young person answers,
[Guest]: you know, and there is a bucket, and in that bucket, there is, you know, a ball, how do
[Guest]: you take it out without your hand, you know, and, and, and then everybody was like, giving
[Guest]: all kinds of answers.
[Guest]: Nobody's like, you know, you can't turn it over, or you have to keep it in etc.
[Guest]: And then a mother was the one who's like, when you put water into it, and then it'll
[Guest]: come up on its own.
[Guest]: And, you know, in this case, like, yes, that's the right answer.
[Guest]: Never got this answer.
[Guest]: My mother is so sharp, you know, so she's, she's very creative.
[Guest]: She writes poems at now also, she's like at 66 now.
[Guest]: And she has these wonderful poems for my birthday, she will write a poem and narrate it by my
[Guest]: wife's birthday.
[Guest]: So beautiful, you know, and so yeah, I kind of knew always that, you know, there is, it's
[Guest]: not right.
[Guest]: But, you know, and I just wanted to be the opposite of that didn't realize that genders.
[Guest]: If anybody would ask me, what is identity?
[Guest]: You know, it's a question that now, I think a lot about, especially in the world we live
[Guest]: in right now, how identity has become so, you know, become such a big issue.
[Guest]: And how we have now reframed every, you know, our identities into nationalism, right?
[Guest]: But when you ask, you know, when we were growing up and you ask, what's your identity?
[Guest]: You wouldn't I mean, I don't know, Indian was maybe one thing you would say, you know,
[Guest]: I would say engineer, because all the boys are engineers, you know, be taken in computer
[Guest]: engineering.
[Guest]: That's my identity.
[Guest]: You know, somebody would say a writer, somebody say artist, you know, those were the ways
[Guest]: that you would define yourself, right?
[Guest]: I would never think of gender as an identity that like, like when you ask a woman this,
[Guest]: what's your identity, she will say woman, because every day of her life, she's reminded
[Guest]: that you're a woman through the way our systems are structured, but men are not, would never
[Guest]: say, although now they are saying because of I think, in a post-media world, every man
[Guest]: suddenly has become more aware of their identity, which is a whole thing, but, but before that,
[Guest]: it was never the thing that, you know, I'm a man that was never it, it was always designation
[Guest]: when I'm a CEO, or I'm a, you know, again, engineer, I'm the owner of these houses, or
[Guest]: you know, I have this much property, your numbers would define your identity, as a young
[Guest]: as a man, and you think about it, it all comes down to your reduced your worth is reduced
[Guest]: to numbers.
[Guest]: It's, it's about how many marks you got, how many trophies you won, how many extracurriculars
[Guest]: you participated in, you know, everything, everything is monetizable, everything is,
[Guest]: you know, has to have a worth attached to it.
[Guest]: You can't even have as a hobby, I remember like when you're going up, and I'd read like
[Guest]: a lot and you know, and then sometimes we like instead of reading this, why don't you
[Guest]: read your school textbooks, because that's the way you will get more marks, you know,
[Guest]: you'd play something, you know, if you're, if instead of doing this, why don't you do
[Guest]: this thing and take part in this competition.
[Guest]: So even a hobby needed to be something that is a is in service of a victory or an achievement
[Guest]: you needed to have, you know, and then how many of these achievements did you have was
[Guest]: what would define you as a man, then salaries became a thing, then you know, then packages,
[Guest]: CTCs, then the number of houses that you have the number of cars, you have everything, everything.
[Guest]: It's all been like a, you know, we've just been reduced to numbers as identities, right?
[Guest]: And we don't think about that.
[Guest]: That's just how it is.
[Guest]: That's just normalized.
[Guest]: And and but somewhere I kind of subconsciously or unconsciously started recognizing or started
[Guest]: feeling that, you know, everything that I'm going through, as somebody who was fighting
[Guest]: this idea that after engineering, I don't want to do this.
[Guest]: I'd gotten jobs in, you know, I was in NID Gurukshetra, like Mahima, and, you know, I
[Guest]: was also taking part in all that.
[Guest]: So I realized in the first six months that I can't do this.
[Guest]: And that's a very big thing for someone who used to be a really like, I was a good student
[Guest]: in school, like I cared about computing, computer science, I used to code, I used to enjoy coding.
[Guest]: And then six months of NID Gurukshetra and while it is somewhat also a reflection of
[Guest]: the college, while I don't think it's entirely that, I just feel it's just engineering as
[Guest]: a setup, you know, and you go in there and six months, you're just like, what the hell
[Guest]: is going on.
[Guest]: And when you realize that you can't do this, then you have three and a half years to figure
[Guest]: out what to do.
[Guest]: You know, I feel like that's like a, I always joke and say this that, you know, in the US,
[Guest]: you'd have people would give after 12th standard, you know, to their children, a gap year.
[Guest]: You go and have a gap year, travel the world, find out who you are.
[Guest]: In India, there is a gap year for boys, engineering college, go for engineering, then you do what
[Guest]: you want to do in life, right?
[Guest]: So I was, it was that on me, I went there and then I was like, okay, now I have this
[Guest]: time and I don't want to quit because again, I'm a man, so I can't just quit.
[Guest]: So I will go through this.
[Guest]: I will somehow, I'll do what it needs to pass and I'll do what it needs to get exams.
[Guest]: I know that I'm not interested in this anymore, but what can I do with my time over here?
[Guest]: So I started, you know, again, doing more writing work, I start, you know, there's a
[Guest]: magazine that I got to be a part of that I created a magazine, a college magazine out
[Guest]: of the last entity and last version of what it was.
[Guest]: It used to be a paper, you know, like two papers on a wall stuck as that was the college
[Guest]: magazine culture.
[Guest]: I created a whole, you know, 30-40 pager proper magazine.
[Guest]: I got into Vishwanathan Anand with Ranbir Kapoor and said like, this is your magazine
[Guest]: now, like, here's what it can be.
[Guest]: I used to, I mean, again, with the official college magazine, became the editor like Mahima
[Guest]: as the one after so, you know, and all of and at college, I kind of just did everything
[Guest]: I could.
[Guest]: I took part in every extracurricular thing.
[Guest]: Now it's reverse because I talk about identity also, as I said earlier, you know, I used
[Guest]: to be someone who is to always be the outside looking in.
[Guest]: Suddenly, as somebody who had a little bit of, I mean, I became aware of my privilege
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: So it is a digression.
[Guest]: I'll go back into your question.
[Guest]: But NIT Gurushetra is when I immediately, instantly became aware of my privilege.
[Guest]: It is a and anybody who knows the way NITs function, you have 50% quota from the same
[Guest]: state and 50% of the rest of the country.
[Guest]: So there was everybody from every place.
[Guest]: And most people were, you know, were not, so to speak, that privileged or, you know,
[Guest]: that came, came from a certain kind of, and I recognize this on the very first conversation
[Guest]: I had in a mess, which, you know, I had no idea what is caste, you know, and as they
[Guest]: say that, you know, if you're upper caste, you don't know what it is, right.
[Guest]: But I never knew and, and I remember the first conversation I had with, you know, someone
[Guest]: in the mess and the boy said, I asked him, like, what do you do, I mean, which, which,
[Guest]: you know, where are you from, he said, Panipat, oh great, I'm from Karnal, great, something
[Guest]: in common.
[Guest]: Then like, what are you doing over here?
[Guest]: I'm doing engineering, computers, he's doing whatever electric, electronics, mechanical,
[Guest]: okay, fine, you know, we'll not the same thing, not the same course, but whatever.
[Guest]: And then I'd asked him, and this is my always my regular normal follow up question, what
[Guest]: does your father do?
[Guest]: That's just the question that everybody asks, you know, or at least I assumed that, because
[Guest]: I was always asked to me.
[Guest]: And you know, when I was in Dubai and Bahrain, and that's how we kind of like, what does
[Guest]: your father do?
[Guest]: You buy my father is working here, my father's working there, whatever it is.
[Guest]: And here the answer was that, well, he's works, he works in a garage.
[Guest]: In my, you know, my upper caste mind, I was just like, oh, he owns the garage.
[Guest]: He's like, no, no works in it.
[Guest]: And then I was like, in my again, I can't fathom I'm just like, so, like, does he
[Guest]: have like this car, big cars, and he works with big cars and because he's like, no, he
[Guest]: repairs bicycles.
[Guest]: And I was suddenly I was like, wait, what?
[Guest]: Like, you know, I mean, it was such a big that everything I used to feel about class,
[Guest]: you know, before I came, because I was the one outsider looking in into these rich folks
[Guest]: in these schools, where everybody where they would talk about like, what do you do after
[Guest]: class?
[Guest]: So I have like a, you know, I have an instructor who comes in to play the, you know, piano
[Guest]: and teach me the piano.
[Guest]: Whereas I had like this one keyboard, you know, I was like, yeah, I play basketball
[Guest]: with my friend.
[Guest]: At that time, whatever we didn't have that many courts, you know, it was like, you know,
[Guest]: and even the reference point they would have of English films, I started watching English
[Guest]: films much later.
[Guest]: I was always Bollywood, I was like, what are these reference points I just didn't fit in.
[Guest]: And suddenly I realized now my reference points were suddenly like, not the same as the ones
[Guest]: and most people in NID Kurukshetra.
[Guest]: And that privilege that that sense of that understanding immediately, you know, it was
[Guest]: now like, suddenly I was the guy in NID Kurukshetra who was who was from the outside, whereas
[Guest]: like people would look at it and again, that's, I mean, it's sad or I don't know what it is,
[Guest]: but a lot of kids would just kind of, you know, give me respect purely because I knew
[Guest]: English well, or they would talk to me with a certain sense of like, I didn't get bullied
[Guest]: as much.
[Guest]: I mean, when I say bullied, I didn't get ragged as much, you know, in college, well, I got
[Guest]: bullied in school.
[Guest]: It's a different story.
[Guest]: But in college, I didn't get ragged because people were just like, this guy's an NRI and
[Guest]: he's well spoken.
[Guest]: And I would dance and I would take part in cultural activities.
[Guest]: And suddenly I was like, oh, he's a cool kid.
[Guest]: And because I was nice and just I'm able to talk to people were just like, you know, affable
[Guest]: to talk to people were just like, you know, okay, let's let him go, let's not say anything
[Guest]: to him, whatever.
[Guest]: So my privilege also saved me from where all the other kids from my batch would get beaten
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: They'd have, you know, half their faces, you know, with blue marks and whatnot.
[Guest]: I was so I just started recognizing.
[Guest]: So I've had this really bizarre incidents in NID Kurukshetra where, you know, I'll tell
[Guest]: you a funny one.
[Guest]: And, you know, it'll also give context to some of the conversations that, you know,
[Guest]: we're having on gender.
[Guest]: The first and this is a true story, okay.
[Guest]: The first day I was in a classroom in NID Kurukshetra and people were asking where all
[Guest]: teachers would ask you, tell your roll number, where you from, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So I said, like, you know, whatever roll number 20, 25 and I was from Bahrain and somebody
[Guest]: said little later, a girl said they're from Dubai.
[Guest]: I said, oh, cool.
[Guest]: So after the class, I went to the girl, I said, you're from Dubai, I'm from Bahrain,
[Guest]: we should like, you know, exchange numbers or whatnot, right?
[Guest]: She was sitting next to a girl, you know, who was from Faridabad.
[Guest]: And I said, where are you from?
[Guest]: She said, I'm from Faridabad.
[Guest]: I said, great.
[Guest]: So can we have like, can I have your number also, we'll just keep in touch.
[Guest]: And now she gave the number, but I thought that she was a little hesitant.
[Guest]: Now in my head, you know, like, in Bahrain, all the boys and girls, we all used to talk,
[Guest]: there was never like a whole thing, which I never realized that NID is like a big thing
[Guest]: for a guy to ask a girl a number and like, take it and whatnot.
[Guest]: I didn't realize all of this, okay?
[Guest]: At night, I have to go, I'm in my room.
[Guest]: And there's a knock.
[Guest]: We used to live it to first year, live it to roommates, there's a knock on my door.
[Guest]: I open the door and there's this big Haryanvi Jat guy, you know, with his four or five other
[Guest]: all well built, strong, good looking folks.
[Guest]: And then he just aggressively asked me, look, what do you think he is?
[Guest]: I'm like, who are you?
[Guest]: What happened?
[Guest]: I'd never seen him before.
[Guest]: Maybe I've seen him before, but I don't know his context.
[Guest]: He's like, do you think he's Bond?
[Guest]: I'm just like Bond, I'm thinking chemistry, covalent bond, you know, I'm like Bond?
[Guest]: And he's like, do you think you're James Bond?
[Guest]: I was like, no, bro, what are you talking about?
[Guest]: He's like, will you take a girl's number?
[Guest]: And I'm just like, first of all, I didn't even recognize, he's like, how did you take
[Guest]: her number?
[Guest]: I was like, okay, what happened?
[Guest]: He's like, do you know that the girl from Faridabad, one of the guys said the girl from
[Guest]: Faridabad is his girlfriend.
[Guest]: Do you know that?
[Guest]: I was like, I had no clue, you know, how would I know?
[Guest]: And I'm okay, delete the number, man, I was just being friendly, I'm not like pursuing
[Guest]: her or whatever.
[Guest]: So he's like, delete number, delete the number, delete it, you know, he's like, don't you
[Guest]: don't mess with the girl from Faridabad, I'll come and beat you up.
[Guest]: That was his whole thing.
[Guest]: And all these guys gave me like, this is your last first and last warning, you know, and
[Guest]: I was like, dude, sorry.
[Guest]: And I was like, I'm a coward, no, I'm from Bahrain, I have a whole cushioned life, suddenly
[Guest]: in Bahrain, etc, etc.
[Guest]: I was a big fat kid, you know, who also wore these loose clothes, I was like fully like,
[Guest]: what's happening to me?
[Guest]: So I said, sorry, sorry, please delete the number, I'm not a hero, please go away.
[Guest]: So he went away.
[Guest]: And then sometime and I was just like, my roommates were like, my roommates were also
[Guest]: from the Middle East.
[Guest]: So we kind of had figured out, okay, let's live together.
[Guest]: And they were also looking at me like, you know, do you not realize that, you know, in
[Guest]: this place, etc, etc, you can't be so open with girls, you know, people like, you have
[Guest]: to be really smart about it, I was like, okay, I'll try and be like really smart about it.
[Guest]: And then sometime later, this guy comes back.
[Guest]: And this time he's alone.
[Guest]: So I was like, bro, forgive me, I didn't know, I did not realize that.
[Guest]: He's like, you tell me, how did you get your number?
[Guest]: And I'm like, I mean, how did you get it, I said, sorry, he's like, no, no, I'm asking
[Guest]: how did you get it?
[Guest]: Explain it to me.
[Guest]: How do you get a girl's number?
[Guest]: I said, what do you want to do, you know, he's like, I want her number, but she's your
[Guest]: girlfriend.
[Guest]: And his actual words were, but don't tell her, she's my girlfriend.
[Guest]: I'm like, what is going on in this college?
[Guest]: So I said, well, I just asked her, man, you have to just be like polite and like, she
[Guest]: gave it.
[Guest]: He's like, explain it to me.
[Guest]: And somehow during then, I mean, this was the first such incident.
[Guest]: And from that point, for whatever it's for, whatever reasons, the Haryanvi kids who would
[Guest]: not very well fit in with all the other kids from different states.
[Guest]: And there was a lot of rivalry and I mean, you know, a lot of anger, a lot of fights
[Guest]: that have happened in our college, etc.
[Guest]: For whatever reasons, I got a little bit of respect because I, again, maybe polished or
[Guest]: whatever in Polish, when I say again, not in a, in just the way that I would speak a
[Guest]: certain way, I was like a, which was, which was this understanding of what, what it meant
[Guest]: to be, what, what your Indian society needs you to be after a certain point of time.
[Guest]: So I was a prototype of like, this is what happens after four years of engineering college.
[Guest]: And somebody who is already knows English, already has, quote unquote, self confidence,
[Guest]: already can talk to girls, already can like write, you know, so and, and for whatever
[Guest]: it's worth, I was not an asshole, you know, and that was something that, you know, everybody
[Guest]: found like a very unique thing about me, whereas other NRE kids typically were seem to be as
[Guest]: assholes.
[Guest]: I mean, no offense, but that's just how it was.
[Guest]: And so suddenly, all the boys, Haryanvi boys kind of also gave me the liberty and the respect
[Guest]: to kind of talk to them, whenever there was something that they were doing wrong, they
[Guest]: would come to me to ask me about like, you know, aise kaise karte hain, aise kaise karte
[Guest]: hain, very generously.
[Guest]: And I really like respect that, that, you know, there were people who would ask ki jana,
[Guest]: ab mujhe ladki saath, I need to ask her out, how do I do it?
[Guest]: And you know, and I'm just like, I've had one girlfriend before this, I'm not like a,
[Guest]: I'm not hitch, you know, mujhe ithara bhi nahi bata, I'm right now, I was, you know,
[Guest]: going through a heartbreak, theek hai, but whatever, I'm helping.
[Guest]: On the other hand, whenever there was somebody who would be rude, obnoxious, inappropriate,
[Guest]: which I saw a lot of, I saw so many young boys, just be filthy with girls.
[Guest]: And in their heads, that's just how they thought.
[Guest]: You know, you flirt, unko lagta tha, flirt karna hota hai ki ladki attitude rakhti hain
[Guest]: na, to as a boy, what you need to do is you need to call and give them gaalis.
[Guest]: To gaali deke na, to usko, apne aap jo na, wo bole ki usko samajh aata hai ki ladka bhi
[Guest]: na, uske andar te se zyada attitude hai.
[Guest]: Aur jab baat chal jayega ki you have more attitudes, wo pighal jayegi, and then she'll
[Guest]: be like, okay, this is the guy I want.
[Guest]: Because this is the guy who'll protect me, because he has more attitude than me.
[Guest]: This is the way they used to think.
[Guest]: Girls would change their phone numbers, they would find a new phone number, leak it, and
[Guest]: then everybody would have, everybody would call in, everybody would send these insanely
[Guest]: dirty messages, and I would watch this with horror.
[Guest]: I'm like, how are you doing this, right?
[Guest]: And again, none of this right now coming from a place where I didn't know what feminism
[Guest]: is or whatever it is.
[Guest]: Just, I thought it's just human decency, right?
[Guest]: Like, don't be such an asshole.
[Guest]: And I'd go up to, like, these kids.
[Guest]: And again, I'm not just saying that they are only from Haryana, they're all kinds of places
[Guest]: that people would become, who would giving me that respect of like, ki theek hai, tum
[Guest]: mujhe bol sakte ho.
[Guest]: I remember this one time where, like, this guy said, in, in a, in a truth or dare game,
[Guest]: among a classroom, in a canteen, asked a girl to say, what is your bra size?
[Guest]: And I was like, how?
[Guest]: And I just got so, I was so irritated, I was like, shut up.
[Guest]: That's not what you say.
[Guest]: And then it became awkward and like, whatever, you know, and then later also, he didn't say
[Guest]: anything to me at that time.
[Guest]: Raat ka again, he came to me, he's a different guy, came to me in the night, he says, dekh
[Guest]: mai teri aizad karta hu, tu jo bolega, main sununga.
[Guest]: Tu mujhe samjhayega na, ki yeh nahi karna chahiye, main nahi karunga.
[Unknown]: But agli baar, tu ne kiske saamne mujhe shut up bola na, toh wahin dhar doga tujhe.
[Unknown]: I was like, but theek hai, chalo, sun toh liya na, aur kuch maara nahi.
[Guest]: So I've come very close to getting beaten up by these guys, but just somehow just been
[Guest]: let off.
[Guest]: But I understood like there is, you know, and in that college is where I got the first
[Guest]: sense of like, the deep, deep patriarchal conditioning that happens.
[Guest]: And you know, again, they were not, these are not evil people, right?
[Guest]: They were not, it's not that they were bad human beings.
[Guest]: It's just that that's how they were conditioned.
[Guest]: Most young boys that I've met at that time, from whichever part of the country, unfortunately
[Guest]: had a certain idea of what women are and what women should be and, you know, what we should
[Guest]: be doing with them and how we should be thinking of them.
[Guest]: And again, I'm not saying that I was not, as a, you know, young horny teenager, even
[Guest]: I used to objectify girls as a teenager, etc.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I was not like, I just felt like this was way too extreme, ki theek
[Guest]: hai tum, you're thinking about them and talking about them with your best friend, like, oh,
[Guest]: I like this girl and whatever.
[Guest]: That's one thing.
[Guest]: But like, you know, getting as part of a community, people used to watch porn together, yaar.
[Guest]: That was the weirdest for me, like, poor community, 6 log, 10 log na saath mein aate na porn saath
[Guest]: mein dekh rahe hain, ek kamadi ke andar hai, I'd just be like, kaise kar rahe ho tum, yeh
[Guest]: kya chal raha hai?
[Guest]: So I was just, I was an alien in that world.
[Guest]: I would just be like, this is, this is weird.
[Guest]: But I realized that there are certain gender dynamics, you know, and again, the understanding
[Guest]: of privilege that I had, that clearly there is, you know, something that I seem to have
[Guest]: an understanding of that others don't.
[Guest]: And maybe, you know, I can try in whatever manner to help, you know, without looking
[Guest]: down, without having judgment, without shaming anybody who thinks like this, just try to
[Guest]: talk them, talk to them and help them understand what, why, what they're doing and why they're
[Guest]: doing it is wrong.
[Guest]: I again did not know what this is conditioning the society, yeh sab mujhe nahi pata tha.
[Guest]: Just as a, you know, again, just as a, I would say a decent person, a decent human being
[Guest]: who later when I realized was, had that, like empathy is also privilege, you know, I genuinely
[Guest]: feel that.
[Guest]: I feel like, you know, having that awareness of, of, you are not born quote unquote, you
[Guest]: know, with again, I, I, I'm using this word again and I, and I want to use it in those
[Guest]: setting of those quotes, sophisticated, you know, that there's an idea that every, you
[Guest]: know, parent has for their young Indian child that, you know, if you wear a certain kind
[Guest]: of clothes, if you have a certain kind of a way of speaking, if you know English in
[Guest]: a certain way, if you, you know, your hair is done in a certain way, if you, if the,
[Guest]: that's what a sophisticated young Indian boy should be like, you know, and it was, and
[Guest]: I started recognizing that this is where earlier I used to look at maybe other kids like that,
[Guest]: that he is more sophisticated than me, now I understand that people are looking at me
[Guest]: and saying that I am more than them, so where I was feeling misfit there, I was feeling
[Guest]: misfit here too, but in a very different way, where I was fully aware of the class and caste
[Guest]: privilege that I had without knowing these terms at that time, and that's where I think
[Guest]: in many ways my, you know, understanding of gender really started from, and then, I mean,
[Guest]: I started dating a girl over there and the kind of shit that, you know, we've gone through
[Guest]: in college, I can't get too much into it beyond the point again, because it is my wife's story,
[Guest]: I don't want to, but we went through some really horrible times in college where, you
[Guest]: know, there were rumors spread about us and whatever it is, just really nasty stuff, and
[Guest]: I was just, I just couldn't understand why would, you know, why would society behave
[Guest]: in this manner, you know, what have we done to any of you, like, where is this coming
[Guest]: from, why would you say something so shameful and so hurtful about other people, you know,
[Guest]: when it comes and break it down into, well, this is what a man does, this is what a woman
[Guest]: does, so clearly there is something here, like, where is this, what is happening, so
[Guest]: the culture only, I just kind of, so where I was fitting in from a lens of, you know,
[Guest]: where I was finding myself at ease in a bunch of people who are definitely who I seemed
[Guest]: closer to, in terms of like, if I would have never gone to the Middle East, these are the
[Guest]: kind of kids I would have exactly been like, right, so I was a little bit more comfortable
[Guest]: and at ease with my friends over there than I've ever been with anybody in the Middle
[Guest]: East.
[Guest]: At the same time, after a point of time, because of the cultural differences, you know, that
[Guest]: because I'd spent that time there, I still started realizing there's a big vast difference
[Guest]: in the way everybody's been conditioned, where my conditioning allowed me to have the privilege
[Guest]: of looking at, you know, people beyond the lenses of gender and as human beings, and
[Guest]: as stories, and versus as like, you know, this is a boy, this is a girl, this is what
[Guest]: they do, you know, I just, with everybody else, there was a very clear divide, and in
[Guest]: that divide, boys behaved in a certain way and girls behaved in a certain way, and it
[Guest]: was, it was a divide.
[Guest]: So I went through some really tough times, again, there's just some stuff that I'd rather
[Guest]: not get into, but, you know, in college, and then when I got into Bombay, again, it was
[Guest]: like a whole shift, Bombay, now, I've been in Kurukshetra for 4 years now, and if a girl
[Guest]: is sitting at a place, where a guy comes and sits next to her, they'd be like, oh, that
[Guest]: guy likes that girl, literally, you like her, you've sat in the same seat as she's at, like,
[Guest]: what is this, what, what are you talking about, Mahima spoke about like the, the hostile
[Guest]: time, you know, times, right, like, I used to feel so terrible about the fact that, you
[Guest]: know, like, I get to be in that college, and at the very minimum, I mean, I didn't go to
[Guest]: the library much, let me be honest, but you know, the fact that there are people who had
[Guest]: access to the library throughout the night, you know, till 12 o'clock, and girls had to
[Guest]: 5.30, 6 o'clock, go back to the, never had, like, you know, the liberty or the freedom
[Guest]: to explore, you know, outside of just the X number of hours they were, you know, in
[Guest]: college, and it was just so unfair, you know, the whole system I had to drop and I was also
[Guest]: coming from a place, I like this girl, why do I have to drop her at 6 o'clock, I want
[Guest]: to spend more time with her.
[Guest]: But yeah, but and then I came to Bombay, and then suddenly, like my, I was in an HT, where
[Guest]: I was one of two guys and in a, in a team where everybody else was a woman.
[Guest]: And suddenly, like where I had been fighting a certain kind of patriarchal conditioning
[Guest]: and misogyny and in the way that things were structured in Kurukshetra, it was the absolute
[Guest]: opposite over here.
[Guest]: And then I had to, again, rewire and kind of be like, Acha, now I can't think like that.
[Guest]: I need to think in a different way, again, I need to like, you know, be more comfortable,
[Guest]: I was not comfortable for the longest time, I couldn't hug girls, it was such a it became
[Guest]: such a big issue for me, like, it became so awkward, I just did not.
[Guest]: I don't I just don't know, like people girls would come and hug every, you know, everyone
[Guest]: in like, in Bombay, this is very cool, and your friends and doesn't matter, right.
[Guest]: But I was just at freeze, I'd be like, wait, you know, someone's guilty, someone give me
[Guest]: a kiss, I just be like, what the hell happened?
[Guest]: Because four years of Kurukshetra conditioned me that deeply to like, look at it as like
[Guest]: a problem, you know, and if you have your own girlfriend, you have your own partner,
[Guest]: that's one thing.
[Guest]: But the moment you are in a, you know, system of people, you have to have boundaries.
[Guest]: So all of this really ultimately came down to two things.
[Guest]: It's a long winded answer, but two things have happened.
[Guest]: One is, as I said, and again, I think we might get deeper into it was mental health, you
[Guest]: know, which is at 30, I got I was diagnosed with clinical anxiety.
[Guest]: And a lot of my therapy ultimately ended up being about gender, you know, my till that
[Guest]: point, I had never thought of my identity as a man ever.
[Guest]: You should ask me what I said, I could have given you x number of answers, but the answer
[Guest]: would never be a man.
[Guest]: And in my in my therapy sessions, I realized that everything that had happened in my life,
[Guest]: every decision that I had made was because I was a man.
[Guest]: Every decision I'd made wasn't for no other reason.
[Guest]: The reason that I had to go to engineering college was because I'm a man.
[Guest]: The reason that I had to, you know, it was such a big fight with me and my parents, when
[Guest]: I had to, you know, be when I had to take up something else outside of engineering when
[Guest]: I had to take up Hindustan Times MTV, you know, my parents wouldn't understand because
[Guest]: I was a man because they had a certain and I had to do MBA, I've studied, I've given
[Guest]: CAT, I've given GMATS, you know, I used to get up at four o'clock every morning after
[Guest]: point in time while I was studying, working at Hindustan Times to go to and to do mock
[Guest]: tests and whatnot.
[Guest]: Because I was just like, I don't know, I was in despair.
[Guest]: I didn't know what else to do.
[Guest]: I was like, I'll do my work.
[Guest]: And in that work for that matter, just to tell you again, at 22, 23, I've interviewed
[Guest]: everyone Shahrukh Khan, Salman Khan, Amitabh Bachchan, Aamir Khan, A. R. Rahman, you name
[Guest]: it, all the big folks at 22, 23, I've done it.
[Guest]: So I was outperforming everywhere.
[Guest]: But there was never enough.
[Guest]: It was never enough.
[Guest]: It was always about the fact that if you do MBA, you'll get this much money.
[Guest]: So I realized that so much, even though now I was, I'd come to Yashraj and I'd got
[Guest]: a bunch of, you know, touchwood success at YRF, where I was in a very comfortable position.
[Guest]: I'd gotten everything that, you know, there's a middle class checklist, you know, you shouldn't
[Guest]: have a designation, you shouldn't have a cabin, you know, you shouldn't have so much money
[Guest]: in the bank, you shouldn't have a car, etc.
[Guest]: I'd got all of that and that was by 30.
[Guest]: And then when I reached there, the question then came to be like, now I've done it.
[Guest]: Now what?
[Guest]: And I couldn't, I didn't have an answer.
[Guest]: Because what happens when you hit those milestones that you've been trying to hit all your life?
[Guest]: There is no answer.
[Guest]: There are, there's just more milestones to go to.
[Guest]: And then I was just like, is that it?
[Guest]: There's this quote, I think, I don't know who it is by, right, like, I hope, say it's
[Guest]: by Jim Carrey that, I don't know if it's by him, but that I hope everyone gets the fame
[Guest]: and money, all the fame and money that they want so that they know it's not the answer,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So I did get whatever, you know, level of what I wanted, the middle class checklist.
[Guest]: And then I realized that I'm unhappy still.
[Guest]: I'm not happy.
[Guest]: In fact, my unhappiness, after all the legitimate success that I was seeing with my work at
[Guest]: Yash Raj, I was just, I felt like I was in a machine, in a simulation where I'm every
[Guest]: morning getting up, going to work, you know, in this traffic, you know, sitting in my desk,
[Guest]: working on something that somebody else, a corporation, even if it was Yash Raj films
[Guest]: that I have the best time working there, I was still working on something that somebody
[Guest]: else might want from me.
[Guest]: There is, I was doing it in the service of getting somebody else a certain amount of
[Guest]: money for an ambition that somebody else may have had somewhere.
[Guest]: What was I doing for myself?
[Guest]: What was I doing?
[Guest]: You know, did I even know what myself is?
[Guest]: You know, do I even know, like, if I didn't have, if I didn't just run from one milestone
[Guest]: to another, if I didn't just go from one day to the next without ever having, I don't think
[Guest]: Amit in my entire life, I have quote unquote chilled on a weekend in my entire life so
[Guest]: far.
[Guest]: I used to fill my Sundays and Saturdays up.
[Guest]: I'd go teach on the weekends, you know, in Jai Hind, in Churchgate, you know, because
[Guest]: I was like, weekends are for, you know, I mean, I have time, what am I going to do with
[Guest]: this time?
[Guest]: I need to fill it up with more work.
[Guest]: I was at one point when I was working at Yash Raj, I was writing an open magazine, I was
[Guest]: writing a Sunday Guardian, I was teaching at Jai Hind, I was hosting a show from Film
[Guest]: Companion, I was programming from Mumbai Film Festival, I was writing something for Scholastic
[Guest]: every year, 80 things I was doing and still I continue doing even though now I have a
[Guest]: better sense of it, but it's so hard, I'm scaling back now Sundays I don't work at all,
[Guest]: but it's so hard, I still get anxiety on Sundays because I don't know, you know, I feel like
[Guest]: am I, what am I doing in that time, I need to make it productive, productivity has to
[Guest]: be the most important thing for me, you know, why, why can't I just relax?
[Guest]: I realized every one of these things came down to being a man, you know, every one of
[Guest]: these things came down to gender and that just really frustrated me because I was like,
[Guest]: I just, because the one thing that I didn't want to be was a man because of my father
[Guest]: and you know, again, I'd grown up all these years angry at him because he was quote-unquote
[Guest]: a man who was, you know, not a good, who's not a father, who was not a husband, who's
[Guest]: not a, was just a man, just earning for his and just constantly and I was doing the same
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: When I was making my first show, I remember like, I, for two years, I did not speak to
[Guest]: my friends.
[Guest]: I did not spend time with my family.
[Guest]: You know, my brother and I stopped talking because I was just so, it was like, if the
[Guest]: show fails, where will I land?
[Guest]: What will my life be?
[Guest]: It had become such a big thing that this cannot fail and it failed very spectacularly, which
[Guest]: was again, and I realized much later that what I went through after that a year after
[Guest]: that was also anxiety.
[Guest]: I just didn't have the terms for it.
[Guest]: But at 30, when I started going through anxiety, when I was doing well, which was the next
[Guest]: new thing, right, like I, my understanding of mental health was that when you are going
[Guest]: through, it happens when you're going through a low phase, I was going through the best,
[Guest]: best phase of my entire life and I was unhappy and I was empty and I was sad and I just,
[Guest]: and I was anxious as I used to have panic attacks.
[Guest]: I used to, you know, I got the opportunity like the, to go for, I mean, started then
[Guest]: there was, there's a event called goalkeepers that the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
[Guest]: hosts in New York in 2017.
[Guest]: I got the opportunity to go as an India delegate, they call 300 emerging leaders from across
[Guest]: the world.
[Guest]: In that first year, Barack Obama was the keynote speaker, Justin Trudeau was there, Malala
[Guest]: was there.
[Guest]: It was insane.
[Guest]: I was invited as a gathering of that people as, as far as you and I are sitting, I was
[Guest]: that far, you know, just a little further from Barack Obama and, and I had so much anxiety.
[Guest]: I was, I was shaking every day, I couldn't wake up in the mornings because I was like,
[Guest]: they will find out that I don't know shit.
[Guest]: They will find out that, you know, I'm an, you know, I'm, I'm not as, I don't deserve
[Guest]: to be here.
[Guest]: I had, I had to go to, I had to go to therapy like three times a week in the week that I
[Guest]: was going to, I would have anxiety about everything.
[Guest]: I remember the day this event was happening, I was in New York for the second, I mean,
[Guest]: the first time I'd done it with my brother, with the second time ever, and I was, I was
[Guest]: in a hotel and I was, and I couldn't get up in the morning.
[Guest]: I just, I had such a massive, the first time I realized that this is what a panic attack,
[Guest]: I mean, later much later I realized, I thought I was having a heart attack.
[Guest]: I was in the bed, I couldn't get up.
[Guest]: My heart was, it, it was all over.
[Guest]: I just, I thought this is it, this is, I'm, this is it for me.
[Guest]: Like it was so bad.
[Guest]: And my first thoughts always just come down to, I wish I'd told my mother my e-banking
[Unknown]: passwords as if there was a lot of money there, there's nothing there.
[Guest]: But those are the thoughts that used to come to my, my head.
[Guest]: But it was just, I was like, this is it for me.
[Guest]: I'm going to die in a hotel room in New York.
[Guest]: You know, it's a nice room, but like, I'm going to die here.
[Guest]: And then somehow after like 15, 20 minutes of trying to deal with it, I caught up and
[Guest]: then it's like, okay, I'm still alive somehow, went there.
[Guest]: But like the questions that started at that time was just like, what is the point of this?
[Guest]: Why am I doing this?
[Guest]: Why does any of this matter?
[Guest]: And these are larger existential questions that I think everyone at some point goes through
[Guest]: for, but for me, it really came down to the fact that my entire life was just me leading
[Guest]: a story that was given to me by somebody else that was given to me by society, not even
[Guest]: my parents and society and parents were given to a society, right?
[Guest]: So I was just following the society's narrative of what a life should be like.
[Guest]: And every fight that I had, every, every day I was angry, my relationship with my father,
[Guest]: my relationship with my work, my relationship with my mother, my relationship with my wife,
[Guest]: everything, every single thing was, you know, colored with patriarchy.
[Guest]: And I tried my best to be the best possible husband to my wife.
[Guest]: I was like, you know, so if the only time I started having weekends or caring was in
[Guest]: Yashraj, people were like, you're the only person in Bollywood who doesn't pick up phones
[Guest]: on Saturdays and Sundays.
[Guest]: I was like, I'm married, I'm with my wife, I don't want to do it.
[Guest]: Because I wanted to be the opposite of my father.
[Guest]: So I was just like, I'm not going to be him.
[Guest]: So I'm going to constantly just give myself that, you know, that space to be a good husband.
[Guest]: But in trying to balance being a great person at work and being a good husband, again, it
[Guest]: was just I was giving anxiety to myself, because I was just trying to fight the narrative throughout
[Guest]: without realizing I'm fighting it.
[Guest]: And then therapy and clinical anxiety when I broke, so to speak, and it got really bad.
[Guest]: And again, it was so much stigma, because again, when in 2015, 16, who knows who was
[Guest]: pocket speaking on mental health, you know, especially among men.
[Guest]: So I just didn't have so much stigma, but finally, my brother, because he had gone through
[Guest]: his own mental health issues, recommended and said, like, you should try a therapist.
[Guest]: It's okay.
[Guest]: It's not a big deal.
[Guest]: Give it a shot.
[Guest]: What's the worst that can happen?
[Guest]: And I did go and and then yeah, my life changed after that.
[Guest]: Because after that, I every session, I mean, it took me a few sessions.
[Guest]: But like the the the defining session for me happened when one day after three to four
[Guest]: months of therapy, my therapist said, I know you want to I figured your problem, I said,
[Guest]: what is wrong as I figured it out, finally, all the and my head was like, if I need to
[Guest]: pass it, that's how you're thinking all this money, money, number number.
[Guest]: So I said, Okay, tell me what's my problem.
[Guest]: She's like, you're not very emotional.
[Guest]: And I got so offended in that sense, I was like, I am not emotional as in my head as
[Guest]: like, what a waste of money the last three months has been, do you not know who I am?
[Guest]: I write long posts, you know, on empathy, and I am like, I cry when I watch movies,
[Guest]: you know, I'm the most emotional person that I know, how could you say this?
[Guest]: I was so offended.
[Guest]: And she's like, I knew you're going to react like this, you know, but let me explain what
[Guest]: I mean.
[Guest]: And she gave me this example.
[Guest]: She's like, what happens when your wife has a bad day at work?
[Guest]: And she comes home after that.
[Guest]: I said, she comes and rants about it, talks to me about it, and then we might just, you
[Guest]: know, go and unwind by watching a movie or whatever.
[Guest]: She says, what happens when you have a bad day at work and you go home?
[Guest]: I said, I'm different from my wife.
[Guest]: I don't like talking about, I want to keep my work life and my home life separate.
[Guest]: I don't like talking about or ranting about, I don't want to burden her with all of this.
[Guest]: And she looked at me and smiled and she's like, you and every man in India.
[Guest]: I said, and she's just like, every man does this.
[Guest]: Every man thinks that, you know, emotions are for a woman to express, but a man should
[Guest]: just take that burden on himself and keep his work and private life separately.
[Guest]: And because burdening someone, the burdens are only for us to take.
[Guest]: By telling, giving it to somebody else would be burdening them and we just keep it inside.
[Guest]: And one day, you know, we burst, whether it's through panic attacks and anxiety or through
[Guest]: heart attacks and, you know, just death, right?
[Guest]: And he's like, that's what I said, what I meant, you know, you can write about emotion,
[Guest]: you can intellectualize emotion, which I still do, but you don't, you don't allow yourself
[Guest]: to feel it.
[Guest]: You don't allow yourself to express it.
[Guest]: And I was like, oh shit, what has she said?
[Guest]: And she's just, and in that moment when she said, this is what men do, I was like, I'm
[Guest]: a man.
[Guest]: Oh shit.
[Guest]: I thought till this point, I just didn't know.
[Guest]: And from that time, every single thing that I have done, you know, I have seen gender
[Guest]: in it.
[Guest]: I have not been able to unsee gender after that.
[Guest]: It's been my whole life after that.
[Guest]: You know, every space I'm in, I'm so aware of gender, every space I'm in.
[Guest]: I can't be in a room where there are too many men and not see that there is no woman here.
[Guest]: Or there's only one woman here.
[Guest]: I can't see it.
[Guest]: And, and which is why also in my company, for example, in you are right now, 26 people
[Guest]: about 69 women.
[Guest]: So it is, it was my most, I mean, at first I wanted to make sure that let's have like
[Guest]: equality and let's have equal gender.
[Guest]: And then after that, honestly, like the most talented people he found for the vision of
[Guest]: women only, which is great.
[Guest]: But you know, but it was, but I can't like, now I just, I know like how, how badly, there's
[Guest]: this beautiful line that I read, there was a Angelina, Angelica Abraham, I forget her
[Guest]: name.
[Guest]: I'm so sorry.
[Guest]: She's a, she's, she's, I mean, she's a politician now, which is also she writes about gender
[Guest]: and she works on gender and she's Angelica, I think her name is.
[Guest]: And she hosted a workshop on gender and, and I just joined it.
[Guest]: I wanted to, and again, I was one of two men out of 50 women over there.
[Guest]: And in that there's this wonderful thing that, you know, it's a great course, if you guys
[Guest]: find it, please, you know, go and be part of it.
[Guest]: It was gender leadership and gender.
[Guest]: So there's a great quote that, that I found there and that I cannot ever forget now, which
[Guest]: is that patriarchy oppresses every gender, but benefits and benefits the men, but it
[Guest]: also oppresses the boys that they once were.
[Guest]: And this learning that when you were a boy, you've never ever thought that you could be
[Guest]: oppressed, right?
[Guest]: I don't think like it's wrong as, as someone who claims to be a feminist, I can't, I would
[Guest]: never say that boys have been oppressed as, as, uh, you know, when they were younger,
[Guest]: how are you oppressed?
[Guest]: We are benefited from gender, right?
[Guest]: We've benefited from patriarchy, except the fact that, was it right for me to not go into
[Guest]: arts and go into engineering, isn't that also a certain kind of oppression when you put
[Guest]: this idea that, you know, it is benefiting them later.
[Guest]: But in their minds, the toxicity that comes from thinking that there is, you know, uh,
[Guest]: that's the only way to be the narcissism is the only way to be being the king is the only
[Guest]: way to be.
[Guest]: Every man should be the man of the house is the only way to be, you know, I think that's
[Guest]: also, and it's fairly, it's correct, right?
[Guest]: Like that's also patriarchal.
[Guest]: It is, it is, it is a patriarchal oppression, oppression where, where every boy has to be
[Guest]: a certain version of a man as, as early as possible, otherwise their life is pointless.
[Guest]: You know, because I work so much with education also, and with, you know, I was shocked to
[Guest]: learn and find, and this happened in my roadshow, which I'll also talk about at some point,
[Guest]: I'm sure, but it, I was shocked to find that the students who said rates among boys in
[Guest]: our country is like three times the rate of girls and, and it's earlier, it was shocking
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: Now it's not surprising after I've been on the roadshow, met all the young people across,
[Guest]: you know, because every boy seems to be just lonely because they don't know the, the one
[Guest]: big and then again, it's been a very long answer, but I'll try and end it here.
[Guest]: But one of the biggest things that I've learned over the last few years about gender is that
[Guest]: here's what has happened, right?
[Guest]: For a certain kind of a young urban woman, and I'm not saying across, you know, I know
[Guest]: intersectionally it's not been that case, but for a certain kind of a young urban woman
[Guest]: or an upper class woman or an upper caste woman, feminism has been a, has been introduced
[Guest]: into their lives, whether it is through the internet, whether it is through friends, whether
[Guest]: it is through communities online, whether it is through mentors, whatever, which has
[Guest]: created these wonderful positive spaces that they have, where they get encouraged.
[Guest]: This is also what I learned on the roadshow, right?
[Guest]: On the roadshow, every young woman would come and talk about gender, you know, what they
[Guest]: were going through because of the gender.
[Guest]: But at the end of it, they would always point out, look at that, because of that girl, I've
[Guest]: survived.
[Guest]: Look at my friend over there.
[Guest]: I just want to give her a shout out because of her today I'm here.
[Guest]: Every young woman, you know, because of, sorry, because of feminism, because of like the girl
[Guest]: tribes that they have, have found these safe spaces where they are not alone anymore.
[Guest]: They are learning from each other.
[Guest]: It's not easy to be a woman in any way, but there is a community today that is helping
[Guest]: any woman who wants to beat the patriarchal system and break out of it.
[Guest]: You know, there is lots of resources, feminism overall, and it's again very difficult.
[Guest]: I'm in no way saying that it's easy, but there is support while this is happening.
[Guest]: And while suddenly women have started recognizing that, you know, they don't need to be, and
[Guest]: again, no offense to anybody who still chooses to be a homemaker, but they don't need to
[Guest]: be homemakers.
[Guest]: They have a choice now.
[Guest]: They can go and work.
[Guest]: They can go and, you know, they can choose not to have children.
[Guest]: They can choose to do whatever they want with their bodies, which is obviously the, which
[Guest]: should have always been the case.
[Guest]: But now they realize that it's a choice.
[Guest]: It's not a necessity.
[Guest]: It's not the, this is the story they were given.
[Guest]: The story that every young woman in our country has been given is that your life's mission
[Guest]: statement is to get married.
[Guest]: You have to get married.
[Guest]: And because you get married, you are, all your life has to be in the service of that
[Guest]: goal.
[Guest]: When you don't get a good guy, your life has no meaning.
[Guest]: Marriage is your life's purpose.
[Guest]: And having a kid is your life's purpose.
[Guest]: And food is your life's purpose because the mission statement is only about getting settled.
[Guest]: And Kanyadaan happens, one man hands you over to another man.
[Guest]: And that's your, you know, life, you know, it's in the service of men.
[Guest]: You're never a woman.
[Guest]: You're always a daughter, a wife, you know, a sister, but you're never a woman or an identity
[Guest]: or a human being.
[Guest]: On the other hand, but now that feminism has happened and women have kind of found out
[Guest]: about this, they are supporting each other and getting, you know, and recognizing these
[Guest]: setups and these traps.
[Guest]: On the other hand, during the same time where girls are now saying, I don't want to get
[Guest]: married at an early age.
[Guest]: I don't want to, you know, sit at home and cook and, you know, just have children, which
[Guest]: is again for those who choose to do it short, but it's a choice as I said, they are choosing
[Guest]: to go against every patriarchal conditioning, etc.
[Guest]: But at the same time, no boy has been told that what you have been doing all your life
[Guest]: is also patriarchal.
[Guest]: There is no tribe for boys.
[Guest]: There is no positive community for boys.
[Guest]: Every avenue that exists for men is toxic.
[Guest]: Every community on the internet for boys, 99% of them, I would say are toxic communities.
[Guest]: They're not about empathy for men having empathy for themselves or having empathy for others,
[Guest]: but about why women is your enemy, because today women is more quote unquote woke.
[Guest]: So you know, the power is going away from men.
[Guest]: So it's all toxic communities that are conditioning into men that women are the problem or feminism
[Guest]: is the problem when it's not the problem.
[Guest]: Feminism is actually for everyone.
[Guest]: But unfortunately, again, it's been weaponized by a lot of online communities to say that
[Guest]: it is only for women and men don't benefit from it.
[Guest]: But then actually, if women are, if women are choosing to work, what that means for
[Guest]: men is that you don't have to earn as much.
[Guest]: You don't have to, you know, work that hard.
[Guest]: You can also spend your life and have an actual work life balance.
[Guest]: You can spend time with your son.
[Guest]: You can spend time with your parents.
[Guest]: You can have hobbies, which you were probably not allowed to have when you were younger,
[Guest]: because you were told your entire life has to be just about work.
[Guest]: But in every way that a woman benefits, a man also benefits, you know, by the burden
[Guest]: becoming lesser.
[Guest]: But men don't know this because no one's talking about it and no community is there to support
[Guest]: men to a positive safe space community saying that, you know what, it's okay if you wanted
[Guest]: to be a writer or an artist or a, you know, guitar player or a chef or a stand-up comedian
[Guest]: or an Instagram model, whatever.
[Guest]: It's okay.
[Guest]: Even if that doesn't lead to the same amount of money you get after engineering an MBA
[Guest]: because guess what?
[Guest]: You will have now a partner who will and both of you will equally contribute in your household.
[Guest]: You need to learn cooking, not because it's a woman's duty or in not a man's, but it's
[Guest]: a great skill to have a life skill to have for anybody.
[Guest]: Everyone should learn to cook.
[Guest]: What is it's a great thing you when you go to host when you when boys go to hostels,
[Guest]: they're completely like, I don't know what to do in my life, you know, because mothers
[Guest]: think that boys don't need to be.
[Guest]: And again, unfortunately, it is mothers because fathers are never at home.
[Guest]: So again, that's so much patriarchy, so much gender conditioning and all the largest problem
[Guest]: now is that girls have understood and have found a community and they're, you know, getting
[Guest]: smarter, evolving into better versions of, you know, what they could be, whereas boys
[Guest]: have not been told this and nobody's creating any positive spaces for boys.
[Guest]: Nobody's having empathetic conversations with boys.
[Guest]: So boys are getting angrier because they are just thinking that because of feminism, girls
[Guest]: have gone the other side.
[Guest]: But what about us?
[Guest]: I did everything.
[Guest]: You told me to do engineering.
[Guest]: I did it.
[Guest]: You told me to do MBA.
[Guest]: But now that I want a girl who wants to marry and sit at home, she's saying I won't.
[Guest]: Why not?
[Guest]: Why did I do all of this?
[Guest]: Then I could have just at 14 decided to be a writer and not having to do all of this.
[Guest]: So that resentment and anger now, unfortunately, is being taken out on women.
[Guest]: And that is why they have so much toxicity on the internet.
[Guest]: That is why you have so much anger in the streets.
[Guest]: That is why you have so much, I mean, everything that women go to a country which seems to
[Guest]: be even more right now is actually happening because, you know, boys are just absolutely
[Guest]: clueless.
[Guest]: They've been lonely.
[Guest]: And now that loneliness has turned into anger and resentment because nobody is trying to
[Guest]: have sensitive conversations about gender with them, saying that now we live in a world
[Guest]: where it's also okay for you not to be the version of a boy or a man that Petra K tells
[Guest]: you to be.
[Guest]: It is okay to not hustle as hard.
[Guest]: It is okay not to work as hard.
[Guest]: It is okay to have hobbies.
[Guest]: It is okay to have work-life balance.
[Guest]: It is okay to cry.
[Guest]: It is okay to, you know, just spend time, you know, without being productive.
[Guest]: It is okay to, you know, not want to, you know, harm yourself because you're failing
[Guest]: in an exam.
[Guest]: It is okay to fail in exams and do something else apart from engineering and MBA.
[Guest]: Every one of these things is okay.
[Guest]: It is absolutely okay.
[Guest]: You don't have to try so hard.
[Guest]: You don't have to be so hard on yourself.
[Guest]: And that anger is also the anger historically we see with all our parents.
[Guest]: Why are most of our fathers angry or violent or alcoholic?
[Guest]: Because for the same reason, they've just buried it all inside without having any avenues
[Guest]: to express.
[Guest]: Anytime they were expressed, anytime they would express, they would be looked down upon.
[Guest]: I told you that I thought my father was weak because he used to, you know, I thought he
[Guest]: was weak because he was going through anxiety.
[Guest]: And I used to look at it as, you know, whenever he would talk about it, complain about it
[Guest]: or go through something, I would just, I would look, you know, what kind of a man is he?
[Guest]: Because that was what was conditioned into me that boys can't, every time I would have
[Guest]: a scrape, you know, somebody would come and tell me, you're crying like a girl.
[Guest]: You know, now if girls cry and boys don't cry, and now I can't cry and I can't have
[Guest]: an healthy outburst of emotion, and I'm always going to be looked down upon as a sensitive
[Guest]: boy just because I'm crying, then I'd much rather not cry.
[Guest]: And that becomes toxic.
[Guest]: And that becomes, that turns into anger.
[Guest]: And that turns into, you know, whatever you see in the world right now.
[Guest]: So it is, we need to have these conversations.
[Guest]: I'm so grateful to therapy.
[Guest]: I'm so grateful to anxiety.
[Guest]: I'm so grateful to my own mental health issues for leading me to a place where today I can
[Guest]: I recognize these patterns in my own life.
[Guest]: I'm trying as hard as possible to overcome any of the toxicity inside of me that still
[Guest]: remains as a product of patriarchy.
[Guest]: And I am dedicating a lot of my life to having these conversations about gender with all
[Guest]: genders, you know, with women, men, and other genders to kind of tell them that you don't
[Guest]: have to be defined by a single story that patriarchy gives you.
[Guest]: You can have any story you want.
[Guest]: You know, you need to fight back against patriarchy, you need to fight back against it.
[Amit Varma]: These are such incredibly insightful and inspiring points.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to read out this lovely para from one of your pieces, where you wrote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: it is tragic that we live in a world where even as patriarchy benefits men, it first
[Amit Varma]: oppresses the boys they once were, the boys who could have grown up not necessarily to
[Amit Varma]: be engineers or doctors or MBAs, but perhaps poets and artists and dancers if they were
[Amit Varma]: allowed to be the boys who could have grown up, not necessarily to constantly and continually
[Amit Varma]: work for money, but perhaps be present fathers and husbands, the boys who could have grown
[Amit Varma]: up without a stigma against feeling vulnerable, punishing any perceived weakness through violence,
[Amit Varma]: but perhaps be kinder and gentler to the world around and to themselves, stop quote, and
[Amit Varma]: the story from your engineering college about you know, you asking for that girl's number
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, that reminded me of a story, a friend of mine told me in Hyderabad recently,
[Amit Varma]: which ends in a great line.
[Amit Varma]: So I've always remembered it, which is that basically, he was in an athletic delegation,
[Amit Varma]: so he had gone for some sports event to Haryana, one of these Haryana towns, perhaps even Karnal.
[Amit Varma]: So there, there was also a local girls team or whatever, he got talking to one of the
[Amit Varma]: girls and they were friendly and they hung out and all.
[Amit Varma]: And that evening in the place where they were staying, a bunch of Haryanvi boys came and
[Amit Varma]: they beat him up, because one of those guys had been trying to put out the girl and the
[Amit Varma]: girl wasn't giving him line of day.
[Amit Varma]: So they beat him up.
[Amit Varma]: And they beat him up and they go.
[Amit Varma]: And then like in your case, that boy comes back.
[Amit Varma]: And this guy is like, what you've already beaten me up.
[Amit Varma]: And the guy just looks very sad and you know, and then he looks at him.
[Amit Varma]: And he brings his face close to him and whispers, daagi toh laal hai, right?
[Amit Varma]: And just the way it was said, daagi toh laal hai, I remember it for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: But it's also very poignant, because the boys who beat up this boy, like you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: they are also trapped.
[Amit Varma]: They're also victims.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, that like you so wisely said, women now have the tools and the language
[Amit Varma]: and the frames to understand this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they may not always have the privilege or the circumstances to act upon it.
[Amit Varma]: But the language is there, the frames are there, they can understand it, they can understand
[Amit Varma]: what's happening to them.
[Amit Varma]: And they can, you know, even if they can't always fight it effectively.
[Amit Varma]: It's there out there.
[Amit Varma]: But for men, it is not there.
[Amit Varma]: Men have no clue.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Sringda Poonam many years back when this was a shorter show on
[Guest]: her lovely book, Dreamers.
[Amit Varma]: And there she spoke about how while girls throughout small town India are asserting
[Amit Varma]: themselves, the boys are just confused, boss.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Kuch samajh mein nahi aa raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: Kuch samajh mein nahi aa raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, what role, you know, when we look at why society is the way it is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one of the really interesting points you made, which I want to ask you about, is
[Amit Varma]: the role of popular culture.
[Amit Varma]: Because typically, one looks at popular culture as a reflection of society.
[Amit Varma]: And the point you made, boss, here it works as much the other way.
[Amit Varma]: That popular culture can actually shape society.
[Amit Varma]: And our popular culture is really all about toxic masculinity, like Bollywood kya hai
[Unknown]: yaar.
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood is basically about, you know, to romance a girl there is basically to stalk
[Amit Varma]: her and harass her and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the men are entitled and the women eventually give in.
[Amit Varma]: So, is there kind of change happening?
[Amit Varma]: Because very clearly, in terms of women, in terms of the material available to them, the
[Amit Varma]: frames available to them, the language available to them, at least the change is out there.
[Amit Varma]: But in terms of men, it's still the great unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Most men can live their entire lives without thinking of themselves in any way, as victims
[Amit Varma]: of this.
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, you mentioned about how on day one, you know, when you had that conversation
[Amit Varma]: with that friend of yours whose father or dad worked in a garage, that a layer fell
[Unknown]: from your eyes that you see your privilege, class ka.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you spoke about how women always have the awareness that they are women, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that's true.
[Amit Varma]: Most men don't realize that women are walking around with an extra layer of awareness ki
[Amit Varma]: raat ko walk ke liye jaana hai, so you have to think, you enter a lift, you're looking
[Amit Varma]: at everybody else.
[Amit Varma]: You always have that extra layer of awareness in your head, which men don't, right?
[Amit Varma]: And one conclusion from that, which is true, is that it's a better world for men, obviously,
[Unknown]: but you don't need that layer, right?
[Amit Varma]: But the other conclusion is that there is another layer about what being a man is doing
[Amit Varma]: to us, and we don't see that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, do you feel that through all your traveling and your work, and we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about all of that in detail, of course, later.
[Amit Varma]: But just as a broader question, do you feel that this is changing in any way?
[Amit Varma]: What is the role popular culture is playing?
[Amit Varma]: Is popular culture letting our society down?
[Guest]: What is your sense of this?
[Guest]: So I again talk a lot about this in my talks, you know, I have for a very long time, I wondered
[Guest]: why does India not have like superhero universes, right?
[Guest]: Superhero kyu nahi hai India gandhar, mallabh you had one Krrish and you had like one, you
[Guest]: know, Drona and you know, you had two three like Ravan, but like you've never had that
[Guest]: culture which is so prevalent in Hollywood, right?
[Guest]: Why is that the case?
[Guest]: And I've been, you know, kyu nahi banti itni, kyu nahi banti itni?
[Guest]: And then at some point it struck me that the reason we don't have superheroes in India
[Guest]: is because every man in every film plays a superhero because he's an Indian man.
[Guest]: You don't need superheroes in India, you have Salman Khan, you don't need superheroes in
[Guest]: India, you have Rajinikanth, you don't need superheroes in India, you have Tiger Shroff.
[Guest]: What do you need?
[Guest]: They are what super, what RRR, why is the world flipping over it because you know where
[Guest]: you have to put a, you know, X amount of VFX logic into why Captain America can take a,
[Guest]: you know, has a super strength and has a backstory where he's become so strong that he can now,
[Guest]: you know, hold a, you know, or Spiderman has to go through a spider like a whole thing
[Guest]: of becoming strong and then can stop a train.
[Guest]: Here, you know, in RRR, you just have to be an Indian man and you can take a tank and
[Guest]: throw it to somebody.
[Guest]: You can take a motorcycle and throw it in someone's head.
[Guest]: And that's just something that people are flipping out, but that's been the narrative
[Guest]: always that Indian men don't need to be, you know, you don't need to have a spider biting
[Guest]: you or a secret serum that turns you into a super soldier or like having gadgets like
[Guest]: Iron Man to become, you know, strong and, you know, inhumanly powerful.
[Guest]: You are inhumanly powerful anyway because you have an Indian man.
[Guest]: And the problem in front of you is that somebody has taken the girl that you like away, you
[Guest]: know, and that's what an Indian woman is supposed to do.
[Guest]: She's the damsel in distress where an Indian man has to, Indian man has to save the girl,
[Guest]: save the day, save the world.
[Guest]: The Indian woman has to be saved.
[Guest]: And during this entire time, you know, her trajectory is just waiting to be saved.
[Guest]: And then in the middle, for some reason, dancing like that's the ways that, you know, Hindi
[Guest]: films have been constructed for the longest time.
[Guest]: So, you know, and we are the only society, again, can you imagine, like we call hero,
[Guest]: like the lead actor in a movie, a hero, right?
[Guest]: It's nowhere in the world do you call the lead actor, the hero of the film, he's a hero
[Guest]: of the film because he's a hero and, and, and he's a superhero.
[Guest]: That is why you're calling him a hero.
[Guest]: And then, and you know, why do you have, you know, films which are called as female led
[Guest]: films in our country now, that this film is a female led film, Tapsee leads this film,
[Guest]: Bhoomi Pednekar leads this film, Anushka Sharma leads the film, it's a female led film.
[Guest]: Because the premise of Indian films is that there will be a hero.
[Guest]: And the moment you don't have a hero, you have to warn the audience that there is no
[Guest]: hero in this film.
[Guest]: In this film, women are leading it and women are not heroes in the minds of like filmmakers
[Guest]: or the Bollywood or the industry at large, right?
[Guest]: A woman who is fighting a circumstance, but a man is a hero.
[Guest]: So heroine means someone who's going to dance and be saved, but otherwise you are a women
[Guest]: led film.
[Guest]: So can you imagine like the even the nomenclature of how we talk about, you know, the vocabulary
[Guest]: we use when we talk about, you know, cinema and we talk about are the people who act in
[Guest]: films, item numbers as an example.
[Guest]: Even now, man, can you imagine that you have, you call it that, you call a dance number
[Guest]: with a girl in a skimpy dress as first of all, that is the number one way to promote
[Guest]: any film.
[Guest]: Just now another film has come out Bhediya, which is about, you know, a man turning into
[Guest]: a wolf.
[Guest]: What does that have to do with an actress, you know, dressing in, you know, and again,
[Guest]: nothing, but that's the way to promote that.
[Guest]: You need to have quote-unquote as, you know, item number where a girl is quote-unquote
[Guest]: an item.
[Guest]: Imagine the derogatory language you're using to even refer to a woman over here and she's
[Guest]: performing a number.
[Guest]: And while of course some people, you know, actresses were smart and, you know, filmmakers
[Guest]: were smart, turn it into an art form.
[Guest]: As an example, BD Jalaila in, you know, in Omkara, which is Vishal Bhardwaj's way of
[Guest]: like.
[Guest]: So there are actresses and there are filmmakers who try to reclaim that idea, that if we have
[Guest]: to do it, we will do it smartly.
[Guest]: If the producer or the studio says that we have to put it, this is the only way to promote,
[Guest]: we will do our own thing from it, etc.
[Guest]: But at the same time, you can think whatever you want for the most widest audiences in
[Guest]: our country, it is still like a provocative number for men to lust after, right?
[Guest]: And you know, to see women in less clothing.
[Guest]: So that's been historically the way we look at it.
[Guest]: Now when you, and again, this was something else that I speak in my talks also with young
[Guest]: people like when you look at the history of the way Bollywood has, you know, gone in terms
[Guest]: of heroes.
[Guest]: And if I just go back, not, you know, there's a Dilip Uma Dev Anand, but if I start from
[Guest]: Amitabh Bachchan for as an example, in the 70s, there was one character that everybody
[Guest]: knew of.
[Guest]: What is the name of the character?
[Guest]: Amitabh Bachchan used to play it, Vijay.
[Guest]: Everyone knows that, right?
[Guest]: Vijay is the angry young man.
[Guest]: Why is he angry?
[Guest]: Because society is not fair.
[Guest]: Society is, you know, oppressing, you know, poor and the people from underprivileged sections
[Guest]: and you want food, you want clothes, you want a house, for that, either you're going to
[Guest]: be a coolie and fight for the rights or you're going to be a don or you're going to be a,
[Guest]: you know, as a mafia in Zanjeer and whatever it takes, you will fight back as an angry
[Guest]: young man.
[Guest]: You are Vijay and it is, and because society is oppressive, you are going to, you know,
[Guest]: get angry and fight back.
[Guest]: Once the economic boom came after, you know, Amitabh Bachchan playing this till Agneepath
[Guest]: in the late 80s, you know, still Vijay Dhiranath Chauhan, you know, a whole 10-15 year period
[Guest]: of him playing that.
[Guest]: In the 90s, the economic boom happened, right?
[Guest]: So now people were not as angry because you're just like, okay, now we have a food house.
[Guest]: They're still entitled themselves.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly, you know, but you get, you know, it's not as difficult right now to fight
[Guest]: for a food house because there's far more jobs being introduced into the economy, right,
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh?
[Guest]: You know, and now you, what happens then?
[Guest]: Then you find, once you have roti, kapda, makka, then what do you need in life?
[Guest]: You need love.
[Guest]: So then you have another kind of a hero that comes up.
[Guest]: And that hero is Shah Rukh Khan.
[Guest]: And he also has a name.
[Guest]: What is the name?
[Amit Varma]: Shah Rukh Khan films, what is the name?
[Amit Varma]: Rahul, right?
[Guest]: Rahul.
[Guest]: He's Rahul.
[Guest]: He's Rahul and he's in every film and he's, you know, spreading his arms and he's looking
[Guest]: for the love of his life and because that's what he needs right now.
[Guest]: And then Rahul went on for, again, another 10-15 years, K3G, till then, 2000s, later
[Guest]: late 2000s, Rahul kept going, Raj kept going, Rahul kept going, Shah Rukh Khan's romance
[Guest]: period.
[Guest]: After that got over, you had a third kind of a hero, you know, that now that you found
[Guest]: love also and you had dating apps coming in, you had like all kinds of different ways of
[Guest]: people became more, you know, brave and courageous to talk about love with their families.
[Guest]: You don't really need to kind of fight for love.
[Guest]: You didn't need to like, it was an open conversation.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan normalized it.
[Guest]: So now when you have all of this, you have Roti, Kapda, Makaan and you have love, what
[Guest]: do you now need?
[Guest]: Then the answer came to like, you know, you need to find who you are, you need to now
[Guest]: go internal.
[Guest]: Everything was external till now, now it's about to become yours.
[Guest]: And then there came a new kind of a hero, Ranbir Kapoor, who is your man-child, who
[Guest]: is, who's got everything.
[Guest]: He's got tons of girls after him.
[Guest]: He's, he might be going after one girl, but ultimately his every film is a coming of age
[Guest]: film where he's trying to come to terms with who he is and trying to find out who he is.
[Guest]: At the end of the film, whether it is through a girl, whether it is through a, you know,
[Guest]: a job, whether it is through any other thing, whether it's a drama or whatever, he, he has
[Guest]: a revelation at the end of it.
[Guest]: And then he realizes this is who I am.
[Guest]: I'm not, you know, I'm not a child anymore.
[Guest]: I'm a man.
[Guest]: And you know, and that process through that process, whether it's in Yeh Jawani, Yeh
[Guest]: Diwani, wherever you see it, ultimately, I don't want to fall, I want to fly.
[Guest]: I want to walk, I want to run, I don't want to fall.
[Guest]: That's the whole generation of young men where Ranbir Kapoor came in and you had another
[Guest]: hero.
[Guest]: He was called Sid and Sid is now Ranbir Kapoor, right?
[Guest]: This is that for three decades of cinema, literally as a character.
[Guest]: And it's a man, that character is a man and he represents what men at that time are going
[Guest]: through.
[Guest]: Immediately after that came like the Ayushman era.
[Guest]: And that Ayushman era is basically, now what happens?
[Guest]: Now you start caring about society around you because now you have found all of these
[Guest]: four things.
[Guest]: You also realize like thinking about yourself is important.
[Guest]: Self-introspection is important.
[Guest]: You know, being quote unquote with Ranbir Kapoor, being a fuckboy is also important.
[Guest]: Then what, what really happens in life, then you maybe start looking at society.
[Guest]: So Rajkumar, Ayushman, they have started like their own, you know, journeys of like showing
[Guest]: the world a prism of, you know, here's the issues with society.
[Guest]: You should care about it, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Here at this point, also the female led film, as I said, started coming in as well.
[Guest]: And you know why it really happened when you kind of go into the history as someone who's
[Guest]: again worked in Bollywood for a bit.
[Guest]: The history of female led films in India is that these are the, these are the films that
[Guest]: men refuse to do.
[Guest]: Most of these films were written for men and then men were like, this is too small.
[Guest]: I'm not looking like a hero in this.
[Guest]: I'm not a big, you know, I don't have much of an action scene.
[Guest]: I don't think my arc is great.
[Guest]: So then the directors and producers would be like, okay, what are you doing?
[Guest]: So then you have to, you rewrite it and say, what if it was a woman?
[Guest]: Examples, example, I mean, NH7 as an example, you know, again, I'm not, I'm not referring
[Guest]: to this film as a very specific film about which would have happened here, but the general
[Guest]: trend, you know, I mean, there are so many films that, you know, I also know that have
[Guest]: changed from being, and I can't, because I was at Yansradha, I can't name them.
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood people won't listen to it.
[Amit Varma]: They'll listen to it.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone will listen.
[Guest]: So, so, okay, as an example, you know, and again, no disrespect to, you know, the, to
[Guest]: my alma mater, you know, again, one of the best times I've ever had, I must say it, and
[Guest]: I'm not saying it for any other reason, because I genuinely loved working there.
[Guest]: Hichki, which was, which Rani Mukherjee ultimately, you know, did, was written for a man.
[Guest]: It was written and they took it to different men, and different men, like, just weren't,
[Guest]: you know, like, I don't know if I want to be a teacher or whatever it is.
[Guest]: And ultimately, then they rethought it and said, what if we attach a bigger actor, but
[Guest]: it's a female.
[Guest]: And suddenly the film became monetizable, because when it's a female, you also pay her
[Guest]: lab because of the gender parity in our country and in all industries.
[Guest]: So the budget of the film doesn't exceed a certain amount.
[Guest]: So it's easy to recover the money also.
[Guest]: So everything then became business wise, it became, you're putting low cost, but low investment.
[Guest]: And then the return can be in certain cases can be a lot more, right?
[Guest]: So it's, this is the way that, you know, female women in our country have gotten their own
[Guest]: films.
[Guest]: It's only happened after men refused to do those films.
[Guest]: And women, when you look at any female led film in our country, now, again, I'm using
[Guest]: that term, because that's the easiest way of identifying them, right?
[Guest]: If you look at any of these films led by women actors, you will have a film which Shahrukh
[Guest]: Khan, Salman Khan, anybody, no matter who it is, will lead.
[Guest]: And you will have any actor between a Deepika to an Anushka, all the big actors of our times
[Guest]: who are female will act in them opposite, even if their role is like five scenes.
[Guest]: And in fact, and it's like a, it's a trial by fire.
[Guest]: It's almost a coming of age for every Akshay Kumar film ki andar, Kiara Advani aagi for
[Guest]: five scenes, then you know, that's when you get noticed.
[Guest]: And then you can maybe someday lead your own film.
[Guest]: That's the way people get to know you when you are opposite, or this is the way unfortunately
[Guest]: things are structured, right?
[Guest]: But when you see a female, a film which has a big female star, you have a Deepika, you
[Guest]: know, in Chhapaak, you have a, you name it, you name it, you have Anushka in NH7, in NH40,
[Guest]: I forget what the title was.
[Guest]: You have Bhumi's films, Tapsee's films, you know, Rocket, Rashmi, any of these films,
[Guest]: the male actors are always going to be folks who are either from a different industry,
[Guest]: because they're not as big in Bollywood cinema.
[Guest]: So they're okay with coming in like Punjabi cinema, I work in South, so I'm happy Dulukar
[Guest]: Salman will come in.
[Guest]: He's comfortable, while of course, I think South films and South actors have their own
[Guest]: mind and they're really smart about taking good scripts versus actually some of them,
[Guest]: at least some of them today don't fall into that trap.
[Guest]: But but you have, you know, you will see that, you know, otherwise it is supporting actors
[Guest]: or indie actors or web series actors who start playing opposite them.
[Guest]: And no one, you will never see like in America, as an example, you will have a Ghostbusters,
[Guest]: a female Ghostbusters, which has four women playing Ghostbusters and a Chris Hemsworth,
[Guest]: whose Thor will come and play a cameo for like, you know, and play a secretary and have
[Guest]: 10 jokes on him.
[Guest]: And it's crazy.
[Guest]: You will have, you know, Brad Pitt doing in Lost City doing like a small role because
[Guest]: Sandra Bullock said to me that, you know, will you come in, you know, do Channing Tatum
[Guest]: and I are doing a film and will you come and do a five minute cameo?
[Guest]: And he said, sure, I will do it.
[Guest]: So you have all of these big Hollywood blockbusters and you have all of these big actors are okay
[Guest]: with doing smaller roles if it's like a female that they love, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But in it's not the case in India, it's almost seen as, you know, I can't, I remember again
[Guest]: without wanting to name the actors, I really respect them, I remember one of the, you know,
[Guest]: so I was having a conversation with Rajkumar Rao.
[Guest]: This was, I was interviewing him at a film festival in, in IIT and Queen had just come
[Guest]: and I said, like, you know, Rajkumar, your work in Queen was just incredible.
[Guest]: It's so great to see you in like that role where you are going, you know, you're not
[Guest]: really playing like you're okay with playing a comfortable with being a negative character,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And he said it publicly only, which is why I guess I can quote it, where he said that
[Guest]: I'm never going to play a character like that again, not because it's negative, but because
[Guest]: it was Queen, it was Kangana's film.
[Guest]: And why am I, you know, playing such a lesser part in that film, I want to be seen as a
[Guest]: lead hero.
[Guest]: And if I continue playing those films, I will never be seen as a hero, I will always be
[Guest]: seen as a actor who is, I won't be seen as a hero, again, quote unquote, I will always
[Guest]: be seen as like this actor who's playing opposite a female in a female led film.
[Guest]: So and now Rajkumar is never going to be seen in a film like if Kangana does a film, you
[Guest]: will never have a Rajkumar in a film like that, you'll always have somebody who is who's
[Guest]: from an indie scene or a web series scene.
[Guest]: So it is Bollywood main itne issues hain, itne issues hain, and, and even with people
[Guest]: who have good intentions, these issues, because now they've created a vicious cycle of this,
[Guest]: and a vicious cycle that gives the people the same thing over and over again, after
[Guest]: which people are thinking this is what they want, which is not true.
[Guest]: Because when you have like, because Aamir Khan, until recently has been a very successful
[Guest]: example of showing that you can give them a good script, and they will take it, a three
[Guest]: idiots has nothing to do with like Dangal for that matter, even with all of its problems
[Guest]: when it came to its feminism, Dangal was a film where Aamir Khan played a 40 40 50 year
[Guest]: old father, and you had two new actresses, there were no songs, you know, which were
[Guest]: quote unquote, again, item numbers, there was no female, there was no romantic, there
[Guest]: was one of the rare films without a romantic angle and made 350 crores, it was the highest
[Guest]: grossing film, Hindi film outside of Bhavbali of all time, you know, so it's, if you and
[Guest]: Rajkumar Hirani, again, you know, while with everything that's happened with him, like,
[Guest]: he was a great example of showcasing that you can have a film on any subject.
[Guest]: And if you do it right, Sanjay Leela Bhansali, now he's done a period of films for whatever
[Guest]: it's worth.
[Guest]: Anand Raidh until again, while his again films have some of them have been very problematic.
[Guest]: Most of these films, when you do something, if you have a good script, and you have a
[Guest]: good narrative, and you have good actors in it, Ayushman's first few films, which were
[Guest]: just absolutely fresh, did nobody could have thought that Ayushman and Rajkumar will become
[Guest]: you know, 100 150 crore actors, but they just started choosing subjects over everything
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: And the subjects were so good that people just started being like, hey, you know, this
[Guest]: is a we want to see this film not because of who's in it, but which also became his
[Guest]: style then, but because of what's in it, Badhai Ho Ke Andar, the film was Gajraj Rao and Neena
[Guest]: Gupta's film.
[Guest]: And Ayushman was one of them.
[Guest]: I mean, I really respect him for being brave enough to do a role where he's not the hero
[Guest]: in that film.
[Guest]: And Sania Malhotra is actually not the quote unquote heroine in that film.
[Guest]: Both of them are the supporting cast of Gajraj Rao and Neena Gupta.
[Guest]: But they were okay with doing something like that because it's a great script.
[Guest]: And you know, when you do a script and you do it with a director that they respect, the
[Guest]: film ends up becoming a hit.
[Guest]: But again, now we have pandemic has happened now again, we have gone back to the space
[Guest]: where now a certain kind of South film, which has a certain kind of misogyny, a certain
[Guest]: kind of same angry young man, the 70s are back in in, you know, in some somehow in the
[Guest]: 2020s.
[Guest]: And now we are seeing I mean, I saw Kantara and everyone's been hyping it up.
[Guest]: And I full respect to the, you know, the acting of Rishabh Shetty.
[Guest]: And you know, there was something very interesting there.
[Guest]: But like, I just couldn't, there was a point in the film where the girl he likes, he goes
[Guest]: and gives, you know, touches her waist in this inappropriate manner, gives her a, I
[Guest]: don't know, twists her belly, and laughs about it.
[Guest]: And his friends say, why did you do that?
[Guest]: That's romance or whatever it is.
[Guest]: It's one of the biggest hits and nobody is even talking, I mean, reviewers are, but I
[Guest]: didn't see any of the reviews or any of the general people opinion that, okay, I like
[Guest]: Kantara, but this scene, I couldn't, the movie for me after that, just after I saw that scene,
[Guest]: I was just like, you know, how can I be comfortable with anything that happens in the movie that
[Guest]: if there's such a rampant, misogynistic, you know, idea over here, right then and there
[Guest]: and the way the woman's character has been treated in the whole film, again, it's just
[Guest]: like a woman who's in service of a man.
[Guest]: So gender is a, I don't think enough people recognize it, you know, if filmmakers in our
[Guest]: country are now making films about which show gender in a new light or show for that matter
[Guest]: sexuality in a new light or anything, I think they're also coming from a sense of business
[Guest]: now that a story like this, because nothing else is working, this might work, so let's
[Guest]: give it a shot.
[Guest]: I don't think there's enough people who are passionate about it, or who care about it
[Guest]: or who and anytime, you know, like as somebody who's also tried very hard to have these conversations,
[Guest]: you if you pitch it that this is about gender, people are just going to be like, I don't
[Guest]: care.
[Guest]: But if you pitch it as entertainment, and then they're like, Oh, but I like what you've
[Guest]: done in gender, they themselves will say interesting.
[Guest]: But if I say that I'll tell you a story, but I'll tell you a story that it's a great story,
[Guest]: then you might be interested in it.
[Guest]: But the moment I start by saying, you know, I think we're trying to reverse, we're looking
[Guest]: at misogyny in this way, I don't want to care, I don't care about message or whatever it
[Guest]: is, because they think that there is a stench that comes with social issues, that the moment
[Guest]: you talk about social issues, you know, there is your your film and your idea and your thought
[Guest]: and your story has a stink to it, that that people try to rub off like it cannot be seen.
[Guest]: As an example, Aamir Khan, again, no disrespect to anybody over here.
[Guest]: I'm just trying to like, when when thugs of Hindustan came, and this is just something
[Guest]: I noticed, right, again, I really respect him, I just talked about how Dangal was, you
[Guest]: know, whatever.
[Guest]: But when thugs of Hindustan came, he went on coffee with Karan.
[Guest]: And Karan Johar said that, you know, you've been, you know, you have been such an impactful
[Guest]: person, you know, you've done, what do you say, Satyamev Jayate, all your films have
[Guest]: social issues at the core of it, it's so incredible, etc.
[Guest]: And Aamir Khan said, no, no, no, I don't make films for social issues, I make good films,
[Guest]: it's a good thing that I got a social message, but my social issue, he was so terrified,
[Guest]: as one of India's biggest actors, to be seen as somebody who's supporting a film with a
[Guest]: social cause.
[Guest]: He's just like, no, no, no, no, no, please don't, you have to look at the like, immediate
[Guest]: fear on his face, that please don't bracket me as a socially responsible actor, I'm not
[Guest]: one, sorry.
[Guest]: I am a hero and I'm an actor, I'm waiting for a thug, I'm killing people there, I'm
[Guest]: doing violence, I've done Ghazni also, look, I do everything.
[Guest]: So don't bracket me in that.
[Guest]: I'm just doing good, good cinema, if they resonate and great, if not, they don't.
[Guest]: And anybody who tries to do talk about social issue, Enraak Kashyap, you will have a separate
[Guest]: fan base, but no one go for his films beyond a point of time, you know, you will have people
[Guest]: just it's, it's sad.
[Guest]: And I just I don't think that you know, when you look at international cinema, and you
[Guest]: look at foreign cinema, you know, you know, as a foreign cinema, non English cinema, you
[Guest]: have something like Parasite, which is about class.
[Guest]: And that's why it won the Oscar.
[Guest]: And they're the people they're aware, they're all coming together to make that commentary.
[Guest]: You have most of the incredible films that are made internationally, have that team,
[Guest]: you know, Asghar Farhadi, any of these people that you have internationally, and they're
[Guest]: proud of the fact that they're exploring an insight or a theme into a social, social and
[Guest]: all art is political, all art is about social issues only.
[Guest]: You may realize it or you may not realize it.
[Guest]: If you realize it, then you are then you're making it consciously if you don't realize
[Guest]: it, you're just, you know, perpetuating stereotypes of a certain social understanding of the world
[Guest]: you have and a certain political understanding of the world, you may not know that you have
[Guest]: done misogyny, but you have done misogyny, and that is your point of view.
[Guest]: I'm not even talking about Kabir Singh right now.
[Guest]: I'm talking about like most of Indian Bollywood like history, which is had casual misogyny
[Guest]: as you very well said, most Akshay Kumar films have had like, you know, just the hero like
[Guest]: a girl by constantly stalking her by constantly like, you know, and that is the way that most
[Guest]: men think.
[Guest]: I know friends of mine, you know, who are women who have gotten into relationships after
[Guest]: men followed them, because they were just like, okay, and this is I'm talking about
[Guest]: maybe 10-15 years ago, because Imran Hashmi made it cool.
[Guest]: And they thought that this is romantic, that if he saw me on this place, and then he followed
[Guest]: me to somewhere, you know, maybe he really likes me.
[Guest]: And because again, and there is a class element to that also, he seems like a person in a
[Guest]: caste element to this also, it seems like he's from upper class, upper caste, so I don't
[Guest]: mind like going out on a date for them.
[Guest]: I don't feel unsafe.
[Guest]: So there is, I mean, so many, so many issues that have been perpetuated consciously, unconsciously,
[Guest]: subconsciously by Bollywood, will it change?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I think the web world is trying some very interesting things.
[Guest]: You have a Delhi, you're seeing folks like Shefali Shah, who was an iconic actor, you
[Guest]: know, being able to now have, you know, lead her own shows like a Delhi crime and, you
[Guest]: know, and kick ass at it.
[Guest]: You know, you have like now, now, a little bit of the internet, fortunately, is giving
[Guest]: the web space is giving a little bit more respect to actors beyond age, beyond genders,
[Guest]: you know, and just good storytelling, you know, but again, I mean, it's a clutter after
[Guest]: a point of time, you know, this when there's too much, ultimately, when everybody wants
[Guest]: to make 20,000 of one thing, then you look at the formula.
[Guest]: And then you don't look at what is the out, you don't look at what is that biggest success,
[Guest]: because that's always going to be difficult to make.
[Guest]: Not everybody can make a family man, not everybody can make a Delhi crime, but everybody can
[Guest]: make a true crime show where a girl gets kidnapped and there's a man who's trying to, you know,
[Guest]: whatever, who's at the hem of it, another man who's trying to save that's the easiest
[Guest]: thing to do.
[Guest]: You get any director, get any writer, get any kind of actor, and you know, people will
[Guest]: watch it because that's what they've always been watching.
[Guest]: So I know I still I feel like I have hope I always have hope that just unfortunately
[Guest]: the kind of person I have, but at this point, I don't see where I don't I don't know where
[Guest]: Bollywood is leading or where Indian cinema at large is leading, especially with the rise
[Guest]: of these hyper masculine South films.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of things I want to double click on and ask further questions about but first
[Amit Varma]: boss Nikhil, I have to say, every time you say no disrespect intended, when language
[Amit Varma]: like that is used, basically what you're saying is full disrespect intended, it's like, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: I don't mean to burst your bubble.
[Guest]: Whenever you say I don't mean to burst your bubble, you're bursting the bubble.
[Amit Varma]: I am with you.
[Amit Varma]: So never mind that.
[Amit Varma]: No, I all of this is extremely insightful in terms of, you know, little things like
[Amit Varma]: how we normalize all of this, either term like item number, term like female led film
[Amit Varma]: at one on one hand, it's a description accurate to her.
[Amit Varma]: But on another hand, the fact that the description is necessary, is telling you something, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just calling someone a hero in a film, sort of telling you something and just the
[Amit Varma]: fact that, you know, Kiara Advani can act in a film led by Akshay Kumar, but Akshay
[Amit Varma]: Kumar will never act in a film led by any woman, obviously.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, earlier at lunch, we were both raving about TikTok.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll, you know, I'll sort of talk about that to get to my next question.
[Amit Varma]: And I had even for a month, I had taught one course called TikTok and Indian society I
[Amit Varma]: had, in fact, taught it on WhatsApp.
[Amit Varma]: So it was like WhatsApp University.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I taught it on WhatsApp was to support my chapters, I had like hundreds
[Amit Varma]: of TikTok videos I wanted to send.
[Amit Varma]: So if you think of the vertical format, WhatsApp was actually the best place to send it sequentially
[Amit Varma]: with my comments and all that, but that was a time TikTok was banned.
[Amit Varma]: So I just did it once.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I loved about TikTok is that TikTok broke through all the structures that existed.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, that happened at the same time as you know, Jio was making broadband almost
[Amit Varma]: ubiquitous.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, a person in a village who might otherwise have felt that no one was making
[Amit Varma]: entertainment for them, that no one was speaking to them, could turn on their mobile phone
[Amit Varma]: and no matter what they were, maybe alternate sexuality or whatever, they might have felt
[Amit Varma]: that they are all alone.
[Amit Varma]: And you can suddenly see people like yourself, creating art and entertainment for you.
[Amit Varma]: And then there is that magic moment where you can turn the camera around, and you can
[Amit Varma]: make something yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And initially, obviously, you would find TikTokers initially doing, you know, those standard
[Amit Varma]: memes with a lip sync to something or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But then going beyond that, I just saw such an outpouring of great original art coming
[Amit Varma]: out of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it blew my mind.
[Amit Varma]: And it was bottom up, which I just loved.
[Amit Varma]: And that way, unfortunately, TikTok was banned.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense has been over the last few years, whenever I look around me across domains,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whether it is in the media, or just across domains, that the mainstream is crumbling,
[Amit Varma]: right, that the mainstream is crumbling, everything is getting decentralized.
[Amit Varma]: And while there is a lag in the transition, mainstream players have no clue what's happening
[Amit Varma]: out there.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Would you say that that's also the case with Bollywood in the sense that the way the industry
[Amit Varma]: works and things is really a bit of an artifact.
[Amit Varma]: They have a notion of what works, right?
[Amit Varma]: And then what you beautifully called a vicious circle kicks into play, where they'll produce
[Amit Varma]: more and more of that, and some of that will work, and then they'll double down on that.
[Amit Varma]: And they'll say, huh, this works.
[Amit Varma]: But they cannot think outside that particular box, that TikTokers were thinking outside
[Amit Varma]: all boxes.
[Amit Varma]: And so do you feel that that's a problem with mainstream industry in the sense that in another
[Amit Varma]: place you spoke about how you did not want to be a filmmaker sitting in a glass cabin
[Amit Varma]: and Andheri saying this is what the youth wants, this is what the country wants.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll talk about that phase of your life also.
[Amit Varma]: But do you think that we are stuck in that space, where we are probably ready for a kind
[Amit Varma]: of content and a kind of art, which people aren't producing because of this lag because
[Amit Varma]: entertainment is still so top down?
[Guest]: Lots to say on this, honestly, where do I begin?
[Guest]: So I feel like fundamentally now we as an audience don't understand the film industry.
[Guest]: It's called an industry to begin with, the industry, Bollywood in one hand, even Hollywood,
[Guest]: most film industries.
[Guest]: Let's just leave some of the European kind of cinema out of it for now, but it's a business
[Guest]: and it's like it's worse than gambling because there's no science to it, right?
[Guest]: When you think about it, every other industry in the world has a structure of what works.
[Guest]: If I am a computer engineer, if I would have gone into the same line, I would be given
[Guest]: a certain kind of code.
[Guest]: I would have a certain problem statement, solve this problem statement, do this coding
[Guest]: and then maybe we'll reach the solution.
[Guest]: There are ideas, innovations you have and obviously still you don't know whether it
[Guest]: will work or not, but there is a structure you can follow to reach there and a lot of
[Guest]: people have reached there.
[Guest]: There's a lot of technological innovation that happens because of structure.
[Guest]: There is nothing that can guarantee a hit film, nothing in the world because if that
[Guest]: was true, then every film would be a hit, nothing.
[Guest]: So there are sometimes films like, you know, suddenly there are films that come out like
[Guest]: an Ayushman film, as I said, can come out and make 150 crores because it was just a
[Guest]: fresh topic, Vicky Doonar came out of nowhere, then from till Badhaay Do, everything kind
[Guest]: of worked like that.
[Guest]: You will have a suddenly you will have an RRR that will come out and blow Hollywood
[Guest]: away.
[Guest]: It is 100% going to be nominated to the Oscars because every American filmmaker has gone
[Guest]: nuts watching it like what is happening over here, right?
[Guest]: But I mean and not everybody can be Raja Mouli, not everybody can be Ayushman, but not anybody
[Guest]: can be like Salim Javed at that time at the height of their, you know, success.
[Guest]: So there is no formula.
[Guest]: And yet, when you crack something that works, the kind of return on investment you can have,
[Guest]: it's pretty crazy.
[Guest]: And you can have it instantly, right?
[Guest]: When you have a business, you have to build a business for 10 years, and then you get
[Guest]: a valuation then you whatever, you know, you put a lot of hard work for a very long time,
[Guest]: and something happens.
[Guest]: You have one and a half years that you put a film in if you kind of put it together in
[Guest]: a smart way.
[Guest]: If it works, you know, you have 300-400 crores that you make, you know, in like, over a period
[Guest]: of two months or three months.
[Guest]: So the return on investment is so great that people are happy to do this gamble, but it
[Guest]: is gambling.
[Guest]: Like you're up as a as a poker player, you said luck plays a chance so often right and
[Guest]: you know, you can have skill, but the same thing in Bollywood, you can have some skill,
[Guest]: but a lot of it is just pure luck, right and and and that's Bollywood, but fundamentally
[Guest]: people think and misunderstand that you know, it is it is it is a place that is out to make
[Guest]: things that the audience would love or enjoy.
[Guest]: That is the secondary object is never the primary objective.
[Guest]: On the other hand, there are fools, the fools like me, there are fools like many other writers,
[Guest]: directors, filmmakers who watch some of these movies that could be made for any reason possible,
[Guest]: you know, and in some way somewhere these films made them feel less alone.
[Guest]: I have grown.
[Guest]: I came to India.
[Guest]: This is a true story because of DDLJ, I grew up, you know, I had got I did my GMAT, so
[Guest]: I did my SATs and I got a great score and all my friends in my circle of friends in
[Guest]: Bahrain went to America.
[Guest]: I was the one who said no, I want to go to India for two reasons.
[Guest]: One I wanted to go to I wanted to go to Bombay and be a and and make it in Bombay.
[Guest]: I was very clear and all of it started with DDLJ and I was like what is this?
[Guest]: I am like I have my favorite thing ever and and the funniest part of this is that I it's
[Guest]: not the thing that worked for me DDLJ is not Shah Rukh Khan, not Kajol, but Amrish Buri
[Guest]: repeatedly saying my country's soil and you know my soil's fragrance and and and I was
[Guest]: like inspired by him to say that yes, my country, my soil, my soil's fragrance, Punjab, I want
[Guest]: to go there, I want to do something there, but like the film also in itself, Aditya Chopra,
[Guest]: I ended up working at Yash Raj, got to work with Aditya Chopra and it's just insane like
[Guest]: you know, but as a young boy, I saw those films and I was like this crazy and when Hrithik
[Guest]: Roshan came, I was just like I was obsessed with Hrithik, obsessed.
[Guest]: I was I have I bought like some 30,000 posters of Hrithik Roshan.
[Guest]: I had created a website, embarrassing but I had created a Geocities website, a fan website
[Guest]: of Hrithik Roshan when I was like 13, you know, so there was something in films, you
[Guest]: know, that spoke to young people who did not and especially I feel like young boys who
[Guest]: just did not know where to fit in, you know, I would see a Bollywood film and you would
[Guest]: speak to any writer, any filmmaker in Lokhandwala Andheri and they will have a story about like
[Guest]: the film that corrupted them, the film that made them realize that this is what they want
[Guest]: to do and it really comes down to an insight that I felt a little less alone.
[Guest]: As an NRI kid growing up outside of India, films were my connect with my country.
[Guest]: It was my connect with my language while of course, you know, Middle East beyond a point
[Guest]: of time has tons and tons of Indians anyway, so it's not like I was in a very foreign place.
[Guest]: Still, you know, there was something that I would see Punjabi culture in particular
[Guest]: is like super resonant in like, you know, YRF and Dharma films and whatnot.
[Guest]: So I'd watch those films and I was like, you know, as somebody who still struggles to be
[Guest]: Punjabi and is very embarrassed by it because it's the language of my, you know, parents
[Guest]: and my grandparents, you know, I would hear Punjabi music and I would see films, you know,
[Guest]: DDLJ and there's all these Malhotras and Khannas and Kapoors and whatnot like, you know, this
[Guest]: is these are my people, right?
[Guest]: But when you enter Bombay and you come to Bollywood, so to speak, you realize that these
[Guest]: are all of this is these are power centers, there are art is elitist, you know, and it's
[Guest]: always been when people look down and say, okay, you've not seen Gone with the Wind,
[Guest]: you're not seeing classics, you're not seeing European cinema, you're not seeing like, you
[Guest]: know, Ingrid Bergman, you've not seen any of these like big filmmakers, big names, you
[Guest]: know, and people look down on you and say that, you know, because it is it was a language
[Guest]: of first a language of intellectuals, then a language of rich people, then a language
[Guest]: of business.
[Guest]: It was never something that anybody can, it was not a democratic system.
[Guest]: Why is there this whole anger about demotivism, but you fundamentally misunderstood what this
[Guest]: industry is.
[Guest]: If you're angry about nepotism, it's I can't even now said no offense, but you know, you've
[Guest]: called me out on it, but people get angry about nepotism, I'm just like, do you not
[Guest]: recognize you think that this is an industry that was made on merit, it wasn't, it was
[Guest]: made on it was business deals.
[Guest]: Everybody's the same family.
[Guest]: 80% of Bollywood is one family, yes, Aditya Chopra and Karan Johar are cousins, you know,
[Guest]: and like in most people don't know that they're literal cousins, you know, and and so and
[Guest]: there were four or five families, you know, in the 50s 60s that started it, and they've
[Guest]: been like, they've grown their empires and businesses, few new people have definitely
[Guest]: come in and whatnot, tried to create Anurag Kashyap as an example to try to create an
[Guest]: alternate culture and alternate industry along with it.
[Guest]: But still it is it is about people who have money, and they will do with the money whatever
[Guest]: the hell they want.
[Guest]: And why would they give them, you know, money to outsider quote unquote, because if I give
[Guest]: it to my son, or my daughter, at least if I fail, you know, I'm putting it I'm feeling
[Guest]: because I pointed on my children, but if I put it on an outsider, and that feels I'm
[Guest]: just like I'm an idiot or what, because it's a gamble.
[Guest]: There is no structure, there's no formula, you can have the best actors, you know, from
[Guest]: outside of Bollywood, but ultimately, you know, it's a risk.
[Guest]: And why would someone take a 30 crore 20 crore 10 crore 5 crore risk on somebody else, when
[Guest]: you can take that 5 crore risk on your family, right and it's the same.
[Guest]: So everybody is in cohort with each other.
[Guest]: It's an incestuous industry.
[Guest]: Everybody is like, you know, you work with each other, that's those have been the power
[Guest]: centers for the longest time, the internet broke it, YouTube broke it, we come to TikTok.
[Guest]: But that's what happened in the and I was fortunate as being someone who was started
[Guest]: off as a, you know, culture writer in Hindustan Times, you know, and was writing about quote
[Guest]: unquote, the seed, you know, I was I was seeing stand up comedy happen.
[Guest]: I've also done open mics at the beginning, I've seen the independent music culture, I
[Guest]: was reporting on it.
[Guest]: I was seeing channel V and MTV transforming into something interesting.
[Guest]: You know, what were they doing for culture at that point of time, this alternate season
[Guest]: Anurag Kashyap and that became my entry in Dev D I saw in 2008-9 ki baat thi, paagal ho
[Guest]: gaya tha.
[Guest]: I was like, what is this?
[Guest]: What I've seen that film in theatres like four times, I was like, how is this like,
[Guest]: what is happening?
[Guest]: Udaan I saw, Vikram Aditya Motwani, Oye Lucky Lucky Boys, I think it's one of the greatest
[Guest]: films ever made of all time, Dibakar Banshee, I went and met them, you know, because I was
[Guest]: I had the, you know, I was in a place I was in Hindustan Times and, you know, after a
[Guest]: point of time, I realised paise toh mil nahi rahe hai, so I made a list of people I wanted
[Guest]: to meet.
[Guest]: I was like, I'm just going to go and interview these people.
[Guest]: So I met all of the people I used to love and, you know, like, I love this guy, I want
[Guest]: to meet him.
[Guest]: I would love this, you know, woman and, you know, as a director or whatever.
[Guest]: And I just have these, you know, lists and just go after these people and they're not
[Guest]: just India lists internationally.
[Guest]: I interviewed Richard Linklater, I interviewed Aaron Sorkin, all the people that I considered
[Guest]: my heroes, I just go after them and interview them, right.
[Guest]: And I would be inspired by how these people are not your, they are not from these power
[Guest]: centres and it's not even easy for them.
[Guest]: They have struggled epically, they have struggled publicly, but they have done it.
[Guest]: They have broken the system.
[Guest]: And that was always something that I kind of always had the back of my hand.
[Guest]: So even when I got into MTV, I was, I joined the digital team at that time.
[Guest]: I was the editor of the MTV website.
[Guest]: As editor of the MTV website, there was one website, nobody gave a shit about it.
[Guest]: I was suddenly this 24 year old who's like, you're free say, you gave a little bit of
[Guest]: a budget.
[Guest]: And I just, I wrote all kinds of articles on it.
[Guest]: And suddenly those articles started going viral, started.
[Guest]: And then there was a team that I was given and a team that I was part of suddenly.
[Guest]: And Koch studio, the first time was coming and then they gave it to me and said, you
[Guest]: know, you are the whatever digital in charge of making it happen.
[Guest]: And I was just trying all kinds of things.
[Guest]: We did like a, at that time, like a video interview pod and we didn't even have the
[Guest]: terms podcast, but we did like a video with all the Shankar, all the people who were performing
[Guest]: at Koch studio.
[Guest]: We did like this video gathering.
[Guest]: We did a tweet, tweet meetup.
[Guest]: So all the Koch studio fans and got them to go to the sets and watch it live.
[Guest]: And these are all experiment.
[Guest]: Nobody was doing this.
[Guest]: It was just fun.
[Guest]: I was there when the internet was, you know, making things happen.
[Guest]: And that's where I made the series on, on, on air after that.
[Guest]: And I made six films at MTV actually, and that's where I got to get into Bollywood.
[Guest]: I made six films with Anurag Kashyap, Anurag Basu, Sujit Sarkar, Nikhil Adwani, Rohan Sippy,
[Guest]: Abhinay Deo.
[Guest]: And I was producing all of them.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a whole, again, other story around that.
[Guest]: But when I got into, it was at that time in 2014, 2015, where TVF, that video, Rohdi's
[Guest]: video went viral.
[Guest]: And I was at MTV at that time.
[Guest]: And this video and everybody in MTV was talking about how this internet video is like, what
[Guest]: is this?
[Guest]: And that was the first, you know, in that sense to break through, you know, and, and
[Guest]: one of the first viral, viral videos, because they made fun of Rohdi's, right?
[Guest]: The show that I was making the disaster of a show that I made was called Reality Stars,
[Guest]: which was a fiction show about reality shows.
[Guest]: We had a, is my whole idea of making a parody or like a satirical show, a comedy about these
[Guest]: bunch of people who want to be part of a show called MTV rejects.
[Guest]: So, so, but I saw that there was, you know, a scene, a literal counterculture happening
[Guest]: alongside where the power centers did not matter anymore.
[Guest]: If you were earlier, and again, I go a little bit into like can, but earlier to become famous,
[Guest]: you know, fame, the idea of fame has always been associated with, you know, being in front
[Guest]: of the camera, being in front of the screen at one point to become famous.
[Guest]: And you see this in old Bollywood films, and you see this in films of your, where you see
[Guest]: like somebody coming to VT station, and Bombay is the city of dreams, right?
[Guest]: And that's where city of dreams, and you know, you will, you come to Bombay, you stand in
[Guest]: a line somewhere, and like, you know, you do an audition, and maybe you become an actor
[Guest]: and Amitabh Bachchan's story is this, someone else's story is that, everyone has come to
[Guest]: the station, went there, stood in this line, and one day he became a superstar.
[Guest]: Then they go to bandstand and talk about the fact that I am now the king of the world,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: That's the story.
[Guest]: But you had to come to Bombay, you had to struggle in those lines, and many, many, many
[Guest]: did not make it, right?
[Guest]: And then reality TV happened.
[Guest]: But reality TV, whether it was Indian Idol, Sarekama, and then of course, you know, roadies
[Guest]: and all of these other shows, they said that you don't have to come to Bombay, we will
[Guest]: come to you.
[Guest]: So we will come to your city, you still have to stand in line, but there'll be judges,
[Guest]: and immediately they'll look at you and say, this person has the potential to be a star.
[Guest]: And then you can be in front of the television and suddenly you'll be a star one day.
[Guest]: So suddenly, like it became closer home, I had that opportunity of becoming a star.
[Guest]: And when the internet happened, even that, you didn't have to stand in line, you didn't
[Guest]: have to even go to a city somewhere, you could be sitting in any part of the country, the
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: If you had an internet connection, which after, you know, Jio and after, you know, 4G happened
[Guest]: in our country, everybody kind of got one.
[Guest]: If you have a phone, this is a new generation, which is, there is no generation before the
[Guest]: present Gen Z generation that have anything in common.
[Guest]: No two Indians are the same.
[Guest]: Everybody has a different circumstance, different story, there's nothing unites us, nothing,
[Guest]: not one thing, colour, caste, creed, religion, everything is different, right?
[Guest]: But for a new generation, the Gen Z of young people, everybody, no matter what social hierarchy
[Guest]: you were in also had like a mobile phone, because of 4G and because of like just that
[Guest]: became your life, right, like you, everybody had to have a mobile phone, if you wanted
[Guest]: to do anything, any kind of work, any kind of like, so even the poorest of the poor would
[Guest]: have like some sort of a cell phone with which they would operate, right?
[Guest]: And that phone in your hand became democracy in your hand, it became freedom in your hand,
[Guest]: it became, you know, freedom of speech, freedom of expression in your hand, you know, YouTube
[Guest]: happened, YouTube still required a little bit of, YouTube is where you saw the first,
[Guest]: you know, batch of folks who broke through and said, I don't have to worry about whether
[Guest]: it was TVF, you know, whether it was AIB, we did Vifilm, we of course had a little bit
[Guest]: of a lot of money, I mean, a lot of money and privilege in that sense, and access in
[Guest]: that sense, but we made our first web shows at that point of time, there was all the bunch
[Guest]: of comedians who came from different places.
[Guest]: And then you also had individual YouTubers, you had your Bhawanbhams of the world, you
[Guest]: have your Prajakta Kohli's of the world, these people who are, who not really from any of
[Guest]: the power centers historically, they have not come from the richest of backgrounds,
[Guest]: they're not from like a quote unquote elite, you know, upbringing, they have broken through
[Guest]: just because their talent and they had consistently and they had passion and they wanted to do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: They would not wait for, they wouldn't knock on a door, wait for someone to open it, they'd
[Guest]: create, you know, doors, they would create the opportunities that stormed through it
[Guest]: because the YouTube equalized everybody.
[Guest]: At the same time, YouTube still required you to have like at least a certain sense of editing,
[Guest]: you would still need to have editing, you'd still need to have, you know, either a camera
[Guest]: or a phone or, you know, a phone with like a good camera.
[Guest]: So there was still a little bit of privilege required, still a little bit of like, class,
[Guest]: certain kind of class for you to belong to, to be able to make something for YouTube,
[Guest]: which was long form, which was, which required a certain kind of skill that not, and not
[Guest]: everyone with privilege had, right?
[Guest]: And then TikTok came and TikTok even broke through that.
[Guest]: You did not need anything apart from like any kind of a phone with a basic camera, nothing
[Guest]: else, nothing, nothing, nothing else, one 5G connection, one phone with a camera and
[Guest]: you can be, you can do whatever the hell you want.
[Guest]: You can, you can record yourself doing anything.
[Guest]: You can instantly become famous.
[Guest]: You can instantly go viral, you know, it, it, it was the most democratic of any mediums
[Guest]: of any art form we've ever had in India.
[Guest]: No one before that, and you know, people would look down on it and say cringy and you know
[Guest]: what, but that's a very classist way of looking at it.
[Guest]: You know, look at these people, you people would look at it to laugh at it.
[Guest]: On the other hand, you look at it to see the, the talent, the, the ambition, the aspiration,
[Guest]: the passion, the excitement, enthusiasm that no matter which background and circumstance
[Guest]: you have from India and, and it had people from marginalized communities speaking up.
[Guest]: You were seeing videos of like, you know, trans kids from like smaller towns in India,
[Guest]: you know, expressing themselves.
[Guest]: You had most of TikTok and some of the biggest early stars of TikTok were Muslim young kids,
[Guest]: you know, and, and you can judge them for, you know, the content they were making.
[Guest]: But before that, no one, they were not allowed to express because where would they do it?
[Guest]: You would require a certain amount of power and money.
[Guest]: And that's the only way expression was always, always, always, they were gatekeepers to expression
[Guest]: in our country and in the world.
[Guest]: And that's why I'm saying art has always been you, people, film snobs, people who call them
[Guest]: the film snobbish because you have a certain privilege and access to art in the first place.
[Guest]: And if you look down on people who don't have that access or who did not have that access,
[Guest]: that's nothing but classism, you know, so TikTok broke through that classism.
[Guest]: And of course, invited a certain kind of judgment, which also came from classism, but it was
[Guest]: the first and only democratic medium.
[Guest]: And when TikTok happened, and you know, when YouTube happened, and when you know, people
[Guest]: started coming on the internet and expressing themselves as authentically as possible.
[Guest]: You see the correlation because I was there.
[Guest]: I can tell you the correlation at that time was that and I've been I've been on those
[Guest]: panels.
[Guest]: I've had those conversations 2014-15 with filmmakers saying that, you know, looking
[Guest]: at what is working on the internet and saying that, you know, maybe we should start talking
[Guest]: about the things that they're talking about, you know, and suddenly you had those stories
[Guest]: that were suddenly socially conscious, they didn't just come out of the blue.
[Guest]: Every filmmaker and producer who punted on those things, they punted on it because they
[Guest]: realized that the internet is making those, you know, conversations happen and they were
[Guest]: happening very actively and it was engaging conversations.
[Guest]: People were watching YouTube videos on body positivity.
[Guest]: So let we can do Dhamaka Ayesha, when you're watching films on, you know, a web show on
[Guest]: man's world that I had done, which was which had which as I said, has like some 90 million
[Guest]: views right now, across all its episodes, it is on gender inequality.
[Guest]: And it's a and people watch that and you see the comments on that people are saying for
[Guest]: the first time we are having this conversation.
[Guest]: So when you do that, a Ki and Ka becomes possible and I'm not saying there's a direct.
[Guest]: It's not like R. Balki saw that and said, let me make a Ki and Ka, but it would not
[Guest]: have happened.
[Guest]: Arjun Kapoor would not have, you know, five years ago, someone who's launched himself
[Guest]: with Ishaq Zadeh would not have done a Ki and Ka where, you know, he's the house home
[Guest]: house husband, so to speak and homemaker and the woman is going and earning, but those
[Guest]: conversations are happening because of the internet and because of YouTube and because
[Guest]: of Tik Tok.
[Guest]: If Tik Tok weren't banned, I feel like we would have seen a different and you saw you
[Guest]: saw a different kind of a young superstar that was rising, you know, who like the idea
[Guest]: of Vijay and Amitabh Bachchan and and the angry young man, you had a different kind
[Guest]: of actual young boy with an identity who would you would not associate with a certain class
[Guest]: or a certain community or a certain idea of what should be a success successful name.
[Guest]: Maybe those names were not people think names that you would know how to pronounce because
[Guest]: they would come from any different part of the country, you know, but the ban unfortunately
[Guest]: like stopped it in its tracks and today again you have all these kind of platforms and it's
[Guest]: still still people are still people who go viral, they're still stars that kind of have
[Guest]: overnight successes, you know, so to speak, but it's not you still it still comes from
[Guest]: a certain class background.
[Guest]: You kind of see that very obviously, you know, you you people who get internet culture people
[Guest]: who have the wherewithal the the access again the privilege the the education the in jokes,
[Guest]: you know to understand that this is what is going to work on the internet and doing it
[Guest]: you still have people, you know, and Amit Bhadana kind of, you know, in Haryanvi will
[Guest]: do something you have like this really interesting platform by the folks who were actually, you
[Guest]: know, started, I forget the name of the organization, but we're in dreamers as well who started
[Amit Varma]: something.
[Amit Varma]: They started witty feed and now they're on stage.
[Amit Varma]: I had Vinay Singhal on my show.
[Guest]: Exactly Vinay Singhal, you know, again, they're doing such interesting work now, you know,
[Guest]: so what is the future of this?
[Guest]: I don't know, you know, the power structures are still very much based out of Bombay, Delhi,
[Guest]: you know, the money flows through there.
[Guest]: So but there is, you know, money that is also coming in and I'm sure that at some point
[Guest]: they will notice.
[Guest]: I saw that when I think either Praveen or Vinay, we're having a conversation online.
[Guest]: I saw that they had come to Bombay too and they went to the sets of Nikhil Advani's show
[Guest]: Mumbai Diaries.
[Guest]: So clearly like filmmakers also taking note and saying like who are these interesting,
[Guest]: you know, young people who are doing something in regional using the internet and ultimately
[Guest]: they have access to communities and audiences that we may not have.
[Guest]: So in the need to find those audiences, which they can obviously monetize, maybe our films
[Guest]: will change.
[Guest]: But my big worry is that they're only going to change because South films are the biggest
[Guest]: hits right now.
[Guest]: So our films will also start again replicating the success formula of South films and South
[Guest]: films and big blockbusters, unfortunately have never, you know, gotten, have never had
[Guest]: an evolved understanding of gender.
[Guest]: That's my worry that again, that'll make a big comeback again in Bollywood because that's
[Guest]: what's working.
[Guest]: That's the formula.
[Guest]: Everyone's right, right.
[Guest]: And then we're going to go backward.
[Amit Varma]: So in the very fascinating episode I did with Vinay, he pointed out one interesting thing.
[Amit Varma]: He said that stage is doing so well that there's now a reverse migration.
[Amit Varma]: Ki Haryana se ya Rajasthan se jo bachche aate the Bombay mein film banane ke liye, ab wapal
[Amit Varma]: ja rahe hai because they can make it in their language.
[Amit Varma]: And not just a language, their dialect, like I'd encourage all listeners who haven't already
[Amit Varma]: heard it to listen to my episode with Vinay because the profound point there was about
[Amit Varma]: how it was of a kind of localization, like I was always worried about homogenization
[Amit Varma]: happening in our society.
[Amit Varma]: One point that Vinay made really well was ki shaher mein bhasha hoti hai, shaher ke
[Amit Varma]: bahar boli hoti hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a city will have a language and outside a city you'll have dialects.
[Amit Varma]: And the typical pressure used to be that a small kid will, like Vinay, born in a Haryanvi
[Amit Varma]: village, he'll speak a particular dialect, but he'll go to the city and he'll feel inferior
[Amit Varma]: because you know, everybody else seems more sophisticated outside and looking in border
[Amit Varma]: wale like that beautiful term.
[Amit Varma]: And the incentive will be to speak to Hindi and so all the dialects die out and that these
[Amit Varma]: main languages Hindi, Bengali and all of those remain.
[Amit Varma]: But what is happening here is kind of the opposite, which is incredibly inspiring that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so many people tell him that they feel so empowered.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people will go and tell him ki are all my life has spoken Haryanvi, but I was
[Amit Varma]: embarrassed about it.
[Amit Varma]: But now I'm feeling ki theek hai, no, I can take pride in my culture.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an incredibly inspiring story.
[Amit Varma]: And I completely agree so much with what you said about snobs, like no disrespect to snobs
[Unknown]: intended.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, one thing, one thing I tell my writing students also is that read whatever
[Amit Varma]: you enjoy reading.
[Amit Varma]: You know, koi hierarchy nahi hai, ki is bookne yeh prize jeeta hai, yeh toh somehow you got
[Amit Varma]: to struggle through it.
[Amit Varma]: No, everything that captures your attention is doing something right.
[Amit Varma]: You will learn from it, you will internalize that stuff by osmosis, you'll pick up those
[Amit Varma]: tricks and all that.
[Amit Varma]: I want to ask you a question about structure in the context of actual filmmaking, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, to take a step back in the creator economy, one of the really heartening things that I've
[Amit Varma]: seen happening over the last decade or so, is what Kevin Kelly wrote about in his famous
[Amit Varma]: essay, 1000 true fans has kind of happened, like Kevin Kelly wrote this cult essay around
[Amit Varma]: 2009 2010, called 1000 true fans.
[Amit Varma]: And his point was that creators will not have to scale anymore.
[Amit Varma]: In the past, your model always has been ki aapko scale karna hai, right?
[Amit Varma]: So your top 1% of people make a lot of money, everybody else is struggling and you know,
[Amit Varma]: having cutting chai in the tapris or varsova.
[Amit Varma]: But his point was that now you don't have to scale a creator.
[Amit Varma]: If you can find 1000 fans who pay you $100 a year, that's $100,000, right?
[Amit Varma]: And when he wrote that, it wasn't happening.
[Amit Varma]: But he was very prescient, because it is happening today.
[Amit Varma]: It is definitely happening today, like on Substack, for example, that $100 a year is
[Amit Varma]: your standard, this thing and all kinds of people who haven't been heard of before are
[Amit Varma]: literally making millions doing that.
[Amit Varma]: So it has completely become possible.
[Amit Varma]: And in the audiovisual medium, the tools of production have become superbly democratized.
[Amit Varma]: Really, anybody I think today, if they have the will, can actually make a film, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like a one great example is a Japanese film, One Cut of the Dead, amazing film, which was
[Amit Varma]: made for the equivalent of 20 lakhs and made the equivalent of 200 crores, something like
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, no film has really filled me with the joy of cinema, as that did.
[Amit Varma]: So the thing is, you know, if you have the will, you can make a film for 20 lakhs now.
[Amit Varma]: But the bottleneck is the distribution.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the problem there is, the model through which we consume cinema is this very
[Amit Varma]: weird model, where a lot of people congregate in a big hall and watch a film together, right?
[Amit Varma]: And if you think about it in isolation, we've normalized that model.
[Amit Varma]: But if you think about it in isolation, or if an alien had to come to this planet and
[Amit Varma]: think about how do we entertain people, this would seem like a very stupid model, because
[Amit Varma]: this requires you to scale, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, what we have seen creators doing in the audiovisual medium is you don't have to scale,
[Amit Varma]: you had TikTok, which you still have elsewhere, you have YouTube, YouTube creators don't need
[Amit Varma]: to scale anymore, you know, but in terms of actual cinematic storytelling, this still
[Amit Varma]: seems like a fundamental bottleneck, ki aise kyu hai?
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there's there are intermediate models, like you have small halls, which people can
[Amit Varma]: just book online, pachas log kuch dekhna chahate hain, bees log kuch dekhna chahate hain, you
[Amit Varma]: have a room somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: What is also another trend that seems to be happening is that the kind of films which
[Amit Varma]: succeed in big theatres are now the spectacle films which require the big theatres.
[Amit Varma]: So your Marvel Cinematic Universe and RRR and all that, and the intimate cinema, you
[Amit Varma]: expect that to move to OTT and all of that, toh Ingmar Bergman OTT pe aap dekho, aur you
[Amit Varma]: know, Steven Spielberg aap hall pe jaake dekho.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so what is your thought of this structurally?
[Amit Varma]: Because again, it seems that, you know, I feel like 15 years later, everything will
[Amit Varma]: be different.
[Amit Varma]: But we can't imagine how because it's unknown unknowns.
[Amit Varma]: But right now what we have is an artefact of the past that we are somehow kind of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, still struggling with.
[Amit Varma]: So my question is structurally, how do you think we can get past this?
[Amit Varma]: The fact that the means of production are in everybody's hand, aap aur main agar ek
[Amit Varma]: idea karte hain, bana sakte hain in very little money, you know, but it will not find a thousand
[Amit Varma]: true fans even if they exist.
[Amit Varma]: The bottleneck is there.
[Guest]: See, you are talking about structure purely because you're talking about film in the long
[Guest]: form medium, right?
[Guest]: But that is not the only way of making film now.
[Guest]: What people are doing with one and a half minutes right now is also filmmaking, you
[Guest]: know, and you can consume for one hour, you know, 30 of those, 40 of those videos or you
[Guest]: can spend that one hour in watching one episode of a web show or you can spend, you know,
[Guest]: James Gunn said this brilliant thing where he said that, you know, I mean, some of it
[Guest]: I'm going to add to it, but because I'm going to Indianize it, but like when you watch a
[Guest]: film in India, let's say, let's say an example, you have to spend half a day of your time
[Guest]: to go and watch that film.
[Guest]: There's half a day of your life that you have to take away.
[Guest]: It's a community experience because India mein films again, to go into the history,
[Guest]: logic, et cetera, the highest crossing film in India at a 500, 700 crores, which is RRR
[Guest]: or Bahubali has been watched by 4% of Indians in theaters.
[Guest]: That's how many people it takes to watch the highest crossing 4% of film people going to
[Guest]: theaters.
[Guest]: Some of them are going for the second time, people, families in India go for films at
[Guest]: a, on a Diwali or an Eid or one of those, because it's an expensive medium.
[Guest]: So it is community viewing because of that.
[Guest]: It isn't family outing.
[Guest]: You go to the park every day, which is free.
[Guest]: And then when you have a little bit of money for the middle class or, you know, upwardly
[Guest]: mobile, you know, then you go and kind of, uh, go and watch a film, take your whole family
[Guest]: and say, which is why the stars also happen because you go and watch the film of that
[Guest]: one person that you kind of know historically, you will not go and watch the film of a younger
[Guest]: person.
[Guest]: And when nationalistic or patriotic films happened, they kind of, uh, you know, said
[Guest]: you don't need to know who's in it as, because it is about your country or the issue that
[Guest]: you care about.
[Guest]: You're going as a community to watch that and say, okay, I want to know what happened
[Guest]: to my community.
[Guest]: So that is an example.
[Guest]: So theaters in India and films that many people anyway don't watch very, very, very few people
[Guest]: watch films, but because they're so big and there's so much money that is thrown at them
[Guest]: and they're so visible.
[Guest]: You have this, the reason in India that people are supersized because of satellite and now
[Guest]: because of the internet.
[Guest]: But before it was satellite, when we film would come to TV, TV rights for films go up
[Guest]: to 50, 60, 70 crores because that is because TV was in every home theater is not.
[Guest]: Everybody cannot afford the theater because and there's a half a day.
[Guest]: Think about it, right?
[Guest]: Like, you know, you are going from one place to another place and traffic you are signing,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, okay, you buy a ticket online, but you, if you have to buy popcorn, that's
[Guest]: another, this money also gone thousand rupees for this popcorn, but if you're not buying
[Guest]: it, you go sit inside the theater, you have to wait for 15 minutes by the rides, you know,
[Guest]: and then finally after like one and a half hours of you just waiting or two hours, maybe
[Guest]: sometimes you just kind of get to watch the film, then you see, you know, the first time
[Guest]: and then you're like, oh my God, I've just wasted my entire day because I've spent this
[Guest]: money and this is a bad film.
[Guest]: So you lose and you don't just lose time and money.
[Guest]: Yes, you don't just lose money, you lose almost a half a day of your life, after which you
[Guest]: have to go finish it because you're paid for it.
[Guest]: You don't even leave midway.
[Guest]: So at the end of it, you go back and then six hours of your life gone.
[Guest]: You know, on the other hand, on the internet, you have the privilege and the power that
[Guest]: if you just sample something on Netflix, on Amazon, on any of these platforms, if you
[Guest]: lose, it's okay.
[Guest]: You're watching three, four minutes.
[Guest]: I don't like this.
[Guest]: I'll go to watch something else.
[Guest]: So you're not really losing that much time, just three to four minutes.
[Guest]: But if you win, which is like if you see something that you love, then you suddenly win 10 hours
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: You have like 10 episodes.
[Guest]: You're like, oh great.
[Guest]: Now my whole weekend is sorted.
[Guest]: Now I can watch this and binge it and do like one, two, three, four.
[Guest]: So it's a victory or defeat that people psychologically feel when, you know, and why right now people
[Guest]: are much more comfortable with watching films, you know, at home versus in theater.
[Guest]: So as an idea also, I just, I think I, I don't, I don't think that it's a, I don't believe
[Guest]: that films have ever been structurally, the long form has been that important.
[Guest]: It has been a means of entertainment for people, you know, and entertainment today is people
[Guest]: are competing for time.
[Guest]: They are not competing for, you know, entertainment as an example, right?
[Guest]: A theater is competing with Facebook, which is competing with TikTok, which is competing
[Guest]: with, I mean, I'm talking about obsolete mediums now, but it is completely Insta Reels, which
[Guest]: is competing with a standup show, which is competing with a, with a, you know, a music
[Guest]: live performance, which is competing with a spoken word, which is competing with cat
[Guest]: videos on YouTube that you're just scrolling through mindlessly or Insta stories that you're
[Guest]: going through.
[Guest]: Your time is the commodity that everybody's after, right?
[Guest]: And, and, and the idea of entertainment also for most people now has been because especially
[Guest]: after the pandemic is now this, we are so conditioned to need and consume and inhale
[Guest]: this entertainment that us, you, if you get up right now and walk out, I will immediately
[Guest]: have my phone, not just to see, like, maybe I'll see my messages and what, then that's
[Guest]: the first 30 seconds.
[Guest]: But after that, I'm immediately going and seeing Insta stories or going through Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: I should get up and walk out with your phone.
[Guest]: Like, otherwise, I don't know what to do with myself.
[Guest]: Immediate reaction, anybody's instant reaction, the moment, like you're in a deep conversation
[Guest]: and somebody has, wait, I have a, you know, I have one second of work, the phone comes
[Guest]: out and the phone, you're not, as I said, you're not just checking it for information
[Guest]: or somebody's reaching or am I reachable or not reachable?
[Guest]: That might be the first instance.
[Guest]: The second instance, what can I see in like nibbles of entertainment?
[Guest]: So we do a lot of research at you also, we do a, we have a whole research vertical.
[Guest]: So we kind of divide it into, you know, food into, so we divided entertainment, you know,
[Guest]: categories for young people into how they consume.
[Guest]: So this nibble content, nibble content is the kind of content that you are mindlessly
[Guest]: consuming in between conversations.
[Guest]: Sometimes I might be talking to you and I might just kind of open the, while you said
[Guest]: something and I'm just like, okay, I might open a phone, just see three stories and keep
[Guest]: that's nibble content.
[Guest]: Then you have, you have your, you know, snacks, snacky content, where you have, where you
[Guest]: go to, instead of Insta story, you might go to YouTube because you have a 10 minute windows
[Guest]: somewhere in between.
[Guest]: You might be traveling, you might be, you know, in a college, in a class, etc.
[Guest]: And then you have 15 minutes, 10 minutes, 5 minutes, you might see a YouTube video,
[Guest]: you might see 5-6 Insta Reels today, you might have any other form of entertainment.
[Guest]: Then you have your full meal content, which is the time you actually with your, at the
[Guest]: time when you are having food, when you are with your family, you see, you decide to say
[Guest]: that I will watch a series now or like a long form, you know, piece of fiction or whatever
[Guest]: it is.
[Guest]: And every bit of our life now is filled with entertainment.
[Guest]: Structures don't matter anymore.
[Guest]: And to your point about why we why there is this stupid idea of, you know, going to theaters.
[Guest]: I mean, I already told you that it was a community experience, because that's how you, you know,
[Guest]: families would go and families have historically gone and you know, it's an outing for the
[Guest]: whole family when you go and watch a film.
[Guest]: But outside of that, it is one of the last few places now to I think it's become even
[Guest]: more important.
[Guest]: One of the last few places where you have a collective experience, where else are you
[Guest]: having collective human experiences and when you are watching a film in theater, why is
[Guest]: it so important?
[Guest]: How do you feel?
[Guest]: I feel it's important.
[Guest]: I don't think it is.
[Guest]: I don't think it is necessary.
[Guest]: I don't think that I think it is.
[Guest]: It is becoming obsolete and and I hope it doesn't die.
[Guest]: But I think it is very important because that collective experience of laughing, crying,
[Guest]: the thrill of a horror film, everybody collectively gasping when you're watching something makes
[Guest]: you again feel less alone.
[Guest]: You're kind of you realize that you're part of a human race, you are part of it's beautiful.
[Guest]: I think it's just so beautiful when you are, you know, when there's an emotional scene
[Guest]: and you have tears in your eyes and you hear another person sniffing and you're like, okay,
[Guest]: I'm not alone in like feeling sad or emotional at this point.
[Guest]: I think that's a very important part of a human experience that we can only get while
[Guest]: watching live, either watching a music performance or watching a sports match or, you know, in
[Guest]: a theater, but there's no other place where you can have a collective human experience
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So it is important only for that reason.
[Guest]: No other reason.
[Guest]: Necessary?
[Guest]: No, I don't think anymore.
[Guest]: I don't think it doesn't matter anymore.
[Guest]: You know, even a 30 second Instagram reel is a film.
[Guest]: And if anybody says it's not film, again, I think it's coming from place of elitism.
[Guest]: If you're saying that, oh, it's too easy.
[Guest]: It's not easy.
[Guest]: I, I tried making it difficult.
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: And young people are inherently recognizing the power and potential of these 30 seconders
[Guest]: to and saying such interesting things, they're doing it in such interesting ways.
[Guest]: They're I mean, the talent on like these short form mediums is incredible.
[Guest]: Who are we to say this is not a film?
[Guest]: It is a film.
[Guest]: It is very much a film.
[Guest]: So, I mean, yeah, I feel like, I feel like, you know, we the future of overall film is,
[Guest]: is, is these broken down things, you know, I feel which is and while we need those larger
[Guest]: experiences when it comes to I think, I think in the internet and particularly now places
[Guest]: like stage, as you said, you know, are going to fill those needs where again, you're talking
[Guest]: about indie films, you know, coming on or the Bergman films, you know, coming on the
[Guest]: internet that's actually stopped happening already.
[Guest]: So you don't have more indie films anymore on these mediums, you actually have far more
[Guest]: masala films because because and this is another thing that I've kind of realized that people
[Guest]: what people don't go to people don't watch these films because they're great content
[Guest]: on YouTube on by paying subscription, they watch these films because they're bad films
[Guest]: and you don't when you have and you watch it because they're mindless.
[Guest]: You watch it because you don't, you know, you're, you're not wasting money.
[Guest]: It's almost free and you're watching free, mindless, stupid content.
[Guest]: You don't, it's very rare now to have intimate and experiences with cinema.
[Guest]: Again those are, those are art and I would love, I would love for us to have more of
[Guest]: those experiences.
[Guest]: I miss those experiences.
[Guest]: I grew up in the nineties on indie films and indie expression and clerks, you know, to
[Guest]: Steven Soderbergh to Kevin Smith and all the folks, you know, Sofia Coppola, all the folks
[Guest]: and their beautiful, beautiful films as an indie Richard Linklater, of course, one of
[Guest]: my heroes, you know, but but those films now, you know, maybe need to be self-distributed.
[Guest]: Platforms are not going to pick those films anymore because platforms are going to offer
[Guest]: the thing that is going to make you stay there and what makes you stay on most of these platforms
[Guest]: after your tired day where you have worked your ass off, you're sitting with your family
[Guest]: and you're not trying to just have a good time is mindless, stupid films, you're throwing
[Amit Varma]: so many insight bombs that I am already feeling nostalgic for this conversation, even though
[Amit Varma]: we haven't even reached the break yet.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of things that what you just said reminded me of it fully from like gender empathy
[Guest]: into like the skill passion that we will very much get back to that.
[Guest]: No, but I'm just saying I, this is the other aspect and facet.
[Guest]: I just love, I just love storytelling and filmmaking.
[Guest]: It's just something that I that drives me a lot.
[Amit Varma]: So what you just said about, you know, the mindless films and, you know, reminded me
[Amit Varma]: of something the economist Rashmini Deshpande said on my show, where she said that her father
[Amit Varma]: once taught her that there are four kinds of films.
[Amit Varma]: There are good, good films, good, bad films, bad, good films and bad, bad films.
[Amit Varma]: And the good, good film is a film that is trying to do something worthy and it succeeds.
[Amit Varma]: So that is your Bergman films, Fellini films, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm big fans of those guys.
[Amit Varma]: The bad, good film is a film that is trying to do something like that, but is basically
[Amit Varma]: boring the pants out of you, which I would say is like money call on, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: then a good, bad film is a film that technically you're not supposed to watch guilty pleasure,
[Amit Varma]: but it's mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: You just love it.
[Amit Varma]: Like you have spoken, I think in the past of Andaz Apna Apna is one of your, you know,
[Guest]: that's a good, good film.
[Guest]: That's a good, good film.
[Guest]: High art.
[Amit Varma]: I agree.
[Amit Varma]: The moment I said it, I, yeah.
[Unknown]: But like a gunda perhaps, you know, or disco dancer, yeah, could be good, bad films and
[Amit Varma]: a bad, bad film is just bad in every way.
[Amit Varma]: So I think the good, bad films are the kind of mindless time pass, which people would
[Amit Varma]: really enjoy.
[Amit Varma]: And I also agree about not thinking in the boxes that we are used to thinking in.
[Amit Varma]: Like we tend to think in an hierarchy of forms that if you're a writer, your book is at the
[Amit Varma]: top, you know, blog post will be at the bottom.
[Amit Varma]: And like, you know, when one of the points I made while I was talking to a mutual friend
[Amit Varma]: Mahima before she started a great newsletter was why does it have to be a book?
[Amit Varma]: You know, newsletter is such a good form and, you know, and she's made so much out of it.
[Amit Varma]: And so that is something where I completely sort of agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: I'm really fascinated by nibble, snack, full meal, you know, double click on that some
[Amit Varma]: other time.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go into a break, you know, that point you made about collective experience
[Amit Varma]: in theater is a beautiful point, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because anywhere else, like you go to a cafe and there are groups of people sitting together,
[Amit Varma]: but a lot of the time, you'll have a group of four looking into their phones, not into
[Unknown]: each other's eyes.
[Unknown]: It's not collective anymore.
[Amit Varma]: While in a cinema hall, everyone else is feeling the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So I often I cry easily at movies, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm always embarrassed and trying to cover it up because hey, men aren't supposed to
[Amit Varma]: cry.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Guest]: Does that happen to you too?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you pay attention to that do you try to hide it?
[Guest]: I'm very conscious of it.
[Guest]: And my wife is Daisy, her name is, and she's, she knows that I cry in movies.
[Guest]: Every time I cry, she, I feel she feels for me.
[Guest]: So she just looks at me as if like, it should be okay.
[Guest]: And I'm just like, let me have this experience.
[Guest]: Don't stare at me when I'm crying.
[Unknown]: I just want to cry.
[Guest]: I don't want to like, have someone look at me when I'm crying, you know, and, and, and
[Guest]: I mean, there's to tie everything, you know, so far that we've been speaking together.
[Guest]: I can't cry otherwise.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't cry.
[Guest]: If I want to cry right now, I will try my best when I can't cry.
[Guest]: And when I feel really, and this is just, I mean, so sad when I even say it out loud,
[Guest]: but when I feel really like sad, and I want to cry, I didn't go and watch an emotional
[Guest]: film so that I will have tears.
[Guest]: So I'm like, at least this is the way that I'm able to, that is the level of toxic that
[Guest]: masculinity is in me, conditioned in me, that I am unable to cry otherwise.
[Guest]: When my grandfather passed away, and I was as close to him, I, and in fact, the reason
[Guest]: that I came to NID Kurukshetra was because it's next to Karnal.
[Guest]: And my grandfather and my maasi lived in Karnal.
[Guest]: And I wanted to spend, I'd never, I loved my grandfather, but never spent any time with
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: So I wanted to live close to him.
[Guest]: And then weekends I would spend with him.
[Guest]: So I was like, very fortunate to have gotten some time with him.
[Guest]: When he died, for two days, I couldn't cry, just could not cry.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because I was, my maasi was crying nonstop, just consoling her.
[Guest]: I was just like, suddenly I fell into the duty of my man.
[Guest]: Okay, my manly duty is that I have to take care of all the guests.
[Guest]: My maasi is in no condition.
[Guest]: So I will take care of all the arrangements.
[Guest]: I'll tell you, tell me what she's, it's not that she wasn't doing, she was doing a lot
[Guest]: of stuff herself, but she was broken.
[Guest]: And her, my uncle hadn't reached yet.
[Guest]: My mother from Barain hadn't reached yet.
[Guest]: Nobody had been able to reach at that time.
[Guest]: So a whole day, day and a half, I was just taking care of all the duties of the, of a
[Guest]: household where someone's passed away without, when my friends came to be like, we're sorry
[Guest]: from Kurukshetra, you know, how are you feeling, et cetera.
[Guest]: And I'm like, sad, didn't have tears.
[Guest]: It's only when one and a half days later, when my mother and I got a quiet moment and
[Guest]: my mother just asked me, how are you feeling that I burst into tears.
[Guest]: I was, and then I was inconsolable because just that moment of her reaching out and actually
[Guest]: caring about my own emotion and being like, how are you feeling?
[Guest]: I was just like, that's it.
[Guest]: I just had tears.
[Guest]: But I can't cry otherwise.
[Guest]: It's very difficult for me to cry.
[Guest]: I yeah, and, and, and films have, and that is also why I am, I, I love film so much because
[Guest]: as a man, I'm able to feel things and feel emotions or give space to those emotions that
[Guest]: I'm otherwise hiding away or I'm otherwise suppressing.
[Guest]: So, so films have been the most important friend that I've had growing up.
[Guest]: It has, it has, it has been, yeah, films and shows and, you know, art, cinema, whatever
[Guest]: you want to call it, have been like a lifesaver for me.
[Guest]: It made me in a world where I was struggling to fit in, it helped me like find a space
[Guest]: for a man who was trying to cry, but not able to.
[Amit Varma]: Then Shah Rukh Khan films happened.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, wrong reason to cry, I guess, you know, his acting is so bad, that would make me cry.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan is the love language of India.
[Amit Varma]: And you've, you've, you've spoken to Shahana, absolutely.
[Guest]: And a book is just such a great book.
[Amit Varma]: It's a great book.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also my most popular episode so far.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a great metaphor, you know, a cinema hall, a cinema, you know, men crying in the
[Amit Varma]: dark together.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a great metaphor.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, let's go for a break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009, and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now, I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast, and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: And once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Nikhil Taneja about his fascinating life and work and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And let's now come back to sort of the chronological narrative.
[Amit Varma]: You pointed out key engineering was basically your gap years, where you were figuring out
[Amit Varma]: what to do with your life.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this process.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, when I look back on my college years, and when I speak to others as well
[Amit Varma]: who've come on the show, what I find is key, there are two kinds of pulls and pressures
[Amit Varma]: happening.
[Amit Varma]: And one is you want to fit in with your peers, you want to fit in with the cool boys or you
[Amit Varma]: want to, you know, so you're molding yourself to kind of fit in or to whatever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: similar to the pressure of being a man in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is you're trying to figure yourself out, find yourself and very often you're constructing
[Amit Varma]: for yourself a self image of what you want to be seen as rather than trying to actually
[Amit Varma]: understand who you really are.
[Amit Varma]: Now I'm guessing that since you landed up there as the NRI cool boy, I guess that pressure
[Amit Varma]: would not have been so intense, the first pressure of fitting in and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But through your life, how has that process been of getting to understand yourself a little
[Amit Varma]: better?
[Amit Varma]: You've already spoken about how the therapy you did later on in dealing with anxiety kind
[Amit Varma]: of helped with an aspect of that.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, take me through this process of understanding who you are and what you
[Amit Varma]: are and coming to terms with it.
[Guest]: I don't think that I had the self-awareness of any kind of self-awareness about myself
[Guest]: when I was younger, when I was in college, you know, as I said, I think the three and
[Guest]: a half years for me were again, once I found out that it was all about like, now what can
[Guest]: I do with my time?
[Guest]: And as I said, I started writing, I started furiously, you know, there's this incident
[Guest]: that happened much later, which was actually quite like sweet when I met a college friend
[Guest]: many years later.
[Guest]: And, you know, I was in Hindustan three, four years after college, I was still in Hindustan
[Guest]: and I was earning a lot of, not earning too much again, you know, 14 and a half thousand
[Guest]: for two and a half years in Bombay, you know, it's just tough.
[Guest]: I met like a friend who had gone to US after that.
[Guest]: And he came back from the US and just came for a visit or something.
[Guest]: And I just met him and I was just, he's like, how's life, I was like, I'm not really happy
[Guest]: right now.
[Guest]: Because he's like, because I'm not earning the money, you know, I don't know if I'll
[Guest]: be successful or not.
[Guest]: And he's not someone I kind of was very close with, you know, he's just someone like I was
[Guest]: friends with, but not very close friends with.
[Guest]: So he just said, he's like, are you mad?
[Guest]: You're going, you know, it's like, why, what happened?
[Guest]: He's like, he's like, I haven't, you were the only person in our college where all of
[Guest]: us were, you know, we used to drink and study, so we sat in our room, you were churning out
[Guest]: issues of your magazine, you know, you were the only one who was, who was late till three
[Guest]: o'clock in the, in the night, trying to make something out of your life, while the rest
[Guest]: of us were, you know, just doing nonsense.
[Guest]: And there is, even if you're not successful right now, there's no chance you won't be
[Guest]: in the future.
[Guest]: So I feel like, as I said, I still have some, you know, until like someone else tells me,
[Guest]: I never look at myself as like, you know, I'm doing enough for whatever reasons.
[Guest]: And it just hit me that, yeah, that's, that's been my college, you know, I actually, so
[Guest]: I don't drink, I don't smoke, I don't do drugs, I don't have, I've never had any of these,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Guest]: I take four numbers of girls, which is clearly the vice, you know, for a lot of people there.
[Guest]: But, but yeah, like, you know, I just, beyond a point, I didn't have enough things, you
[Guest]: know, times or reasons to hang out with, you know, you hang out with your friends until
[Guest]: they start drinking, because after they're drinking, then it's just a drunken conversation
[Guest]: where you are the sober person, you're like, what am I doing here?
[Guest]: So you don't have those conversations.
[Guest]: I did.
[Guest]: Although, on the other hand, I think while I didn't learn much about myself, I learned
[Guest]: a lot about India, you know, because, again, fortunately, unfortunately, there's no LAN
[Guest]: in our, this is 2004 to 2008.
[Guest]: That's where I studied.
[Guest]: 2000, there was no LAN in our college.
[Guest]: And there was only like one computer center where you had internet.
[Guest]: So in your hostel, and because Haryana and North India, and there's always power cuts.
[Guest]: So every night for one and a half hours, the electricity would just go off.
[Guest]: And then what do you do?
[Guest]: Your phone at that time, again, was expensive.
[Guest]: So you can't call people until I think my third year things became inexpensive and you
[Guest]: had free calling and free messaging, or whatever.
[Guest]: And that's the year I made a girlfriend.
[Guest]: So clearly, thank you Airtel.
[Guest]: But before that, you didn't even know enough, I mean, while you had that one number after
[Guest]: that incident, I was like, I'm never calling a woman in my life now.
[Guest]: But so what did you do?
[Guest]: And I kind of started after like getting really bored and, you know, talking to my roommates
[Guest]: and my roommates, I didn't really get along within the first couple of I mean, decent
[Guest]: people just didn't have much in common.
[Guest]: I started recognizing that, you know, well, I'm in this campus where there are these people
[Guest]: from all over the country, from every state of India.
[Guest]: I have every day there's a power cut, I have nothing to do, nobody can do anything in first
[Guest]: year.
[Guest]: So maybe I'll just go and like, find the stories of others, right?
[Guest]: And it wasn't like a conscious, like, I'm going to find the stories of others.
[Guest]: It was more like, let me just go and chat with other people, right?
[Guest]: So I just go up to somebody's room and like, I've never met and just knock on their door
[Guest]: and be like, you know, we stayed the same, you know, yeah, same hostel or the same floor
[Guest]: or whatever it is.
[Guest]: And we've never spoken.
[Guest]: So yeah, I'm Nikhil and this is where I'm from, I'd love to know a little bit about
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: And then suddenly, like some of those conversations would go nowhere, people were just also not
[Guest]: very open.
[Guest]: And then some of them would just turn into like really deep conversations.
[Guest]: And and sometimes I would have it only once in like, I've spoken to some people during
[Guest]: power cuts once and never spoken to them again, beyond hi, hello for the rest of my college
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: But that one conversation was deep enough for me to kind of, you know, like if I if
[Guest]: we ever see each other in public, we hug the hell out of each other and just be like, Oh,
[Guest]: my God, like, so great to see you after all these years.
[Guest]: So because of that, I kind of got a sense and understanding of, you know, the stories
[Guest]: of others.
[Guest]: And I think that helped me recognize a little bit of our own story as well.
[Guest]: I didn't know what stories were, I didn't know that, you know, like, again, self awareness
[Guest]: neither you didn't have the internet, I, you didn't, as even though I was writing for a
[Guest]: newspaper, you know, or a magazine at that time, even at that time, I did not have like
[Guest]: Chetan Bhagat did not exist at that time.
[Guest]: Even at that time, there was no example, a public example of, you know, people who could
[Guest]: have stories like mine.
[Guest]: And most of the stories I would hear of people who kind of did the other thing, right?
[Guest]: So you kind of also connected with that somebody who's a lovely singer, I would find out, you
[Guest]: know, who's come from this.
[Guest]: But the reason that I'm like, why don't you go into one of these reality shows and like,
[Guest]: you know, try singing, just be like, I'm the only child of my family.
[Guest]: And or I'm the, you know, elder son of my family.
[Guest]: And my aim is to make it to Microsoft.
[Guest]: Because that's the way I mean, I need to my parents have put so much money, you know,
[Guest]: I need to be the return on investment for them.
[Guest]: And for whatever it was that boy is in Microsoft now.
[Guest]: And you know, he's made it but he's a beautiful singing voice, which I don't know if anybody
[Guest]: will ever get to listen to beyond like, the close circle of friends that he may have,
[Guest]: which is also okay, you know, I mean, sure.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying like, so many stories that I would hear from so many people from
[Guest]: all these different parts of India, there's a boy from like, Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: That I was, it just helped me recognize that, there are so many stories, you know, and every
[Guest]: story kind of has a, you know, starts with, you know, I mean, nobody really knows where
[Guest]: it's leading.
[Guest]: Nobody is aware that, you know, which act of our stories are we are in.
[Guest]: But there is something there, you know, that, that somewhere makes you recognize that you
[Guest]: are also a story, you know, where I feel like all of us look at each, I mean, so NID Gurushekhar
[Guest]: also how we call each other, you know, after a point of time, either we make boys by surname,
[Guest]: but in our culture, you know, you start calling from wherever you are, so the boy from Bareta,
[Guest]: you know, is called Bareta.
[Guest]: The boy from Jammu is called Jammu, you know, Jammu, come here, Bareta, come here.
[Amit Varma]: So what was yours?
[Guest]: Barain?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, Barain for a, you know, a long time, it was Barain Nidhokarnal, but after, as I
[Guest]: said, like for me, for whatever reason, I was always seen as like this.
[Guest]: So people would typically call me Taneja or close people would call me like whatever Motu
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: But I started looking at realizing that every one of them with whatever names or whatever
[Guest]: labels they were given, there was a story about them that nobody would know that, you
[Guest]: know, if you just didn't ask them, everyone had a stereotype.
[Guest]: There's a backbencher, there's a frontbencher, there's a gissu kid, there's a frustu kid,
[Guest]: all these terms that we used to give each other, you know.
[Guest]: But beyond that, they all had like this really deep stories that even they wouldn't ever
[Guest]: think about.
[Guest]: But that's all I could think about.
[Guest]: I can't get out of my mind that there is a boy who has such a beautiful singing voice,
[Guest]: but who's, you know, because he's the eldest son of the family has to only, you know, study
[Guest]: and do engineering because he has to get into a certain place and he has to make his family
[Guest]: circumstance better.
[Guest]: Now that's because I have the privilege to not think at that time, I'd found myself having
[Guest]: the privilege to not think about and yet I was not living my own story.
[Guest]: I was also doing engineering, even though I liked writing and I was writing in newspapers
[Guest]: and magazines and I created my own magazine.
[Guest]: I've done everything, but I was not doing and you know, funnily what happened and such
[Guest]: a funny random thing sometimes that happens to you that like puts you on a different path.
[Guest]: One of my first roommates in my second year, actually first year only afterwards, the second
[Guest]: roommate I ever had, who I became very good friends with in year one.
[Guest]: I had met him.
[Guest]: I mean, we had not spoken for a bit.
[Guest]: We had become decent friends, but never for a, we just kind of lost touch in the middle.
[Guest]: We were in different sections and different batches.
[Guest]: One day again, power cut happened, fourth year, final year of college.
[Guest]: I've already got two jobs.
[Guest]: I've got Accenture, CSE, bit of sort in that sense and you know, I'm like, now I'm chilling
[Guest]: as a senior, nothing to do, two jobs, you can't get more, like to cap at two.
[Guest]: This guy meets me in a power cut, he's like, how's your life going, kaise chal rahi hai
[Guest]: zindagi?
[Guest]: I'm just like, yaar, accha chal raha hai, got two jobs, etc.
[Guest]: He's like, acha, tu bhi yeh hi karega, tu ne toh bola tha ki, I mean, tere uska kya hua
[Guest]: writing, writing ga, tu bahut likhta tha us time par bhi, young times, old times, four
[Guest]: years ago.
[Guest]: I was like, haan, main soch raha hun ki, and this was my plan at that time, ki main, you
[Guest]: know, one of the jobs, CSE, will give me Bombay as the, which is the place you want to be
[Guest]: located.
[Guest]: They give you the option.
[Guest]: I will go to Bombay and, you know, main din mein yeh karunga, side mein na main, you know,
[Guest]: writing karunga, and that's how, like, it's my plan right now.
[Guest]: Aur jab wo chalne lag jayega, then I will leave it and do this.
[Guest]: And this guy is just very nonchalantly, in the complete nonchalance, said like, he's
[Guest]: like, haan, sahi idea hai, tu aisa karna, tu pehle Bombay jaana, side mein yeh karna,
[Guest]: phir tu MBA karna, side mein writing karna, phir shadi karna, side mein writing karna,
[Guest]: phir bache karna, side mein writing karna, phir tu ek din mar jayega na, tu writing
[Guest]: side mein rehgi.
[Guest]: You know, aur bolte bolte bol gaya, and you know, chal bhai, what, I mean, you do just
[Guest]: like, I, suddenly my life flashed in my entire, in front of my eyes, and I was like, that
[Guest]: is so true.
[Guest]: I could just be doing this, and that's what I'd been doing till then, since 14 to now,
[Guest]: I was 20 at that time, 6 years, all of this were, these were side pursuits for me.
[Guest]: They were never the, because, again, arts nahi kar sakte hai, toh hobby hai, this cannot
[Guest]: be your live stream.
[Guest]: And then I realized, like, I have, I now already had two jobs, and one of them was in, you
[Guest]: know, July, I had to join in July, and one I have to join in August.
[Guest]: My college finished in April.
[Guest]: So then I was like, from the time this conversation happened, which I think would have been in
[Guest]: the end of first semester, beginning of second semester, I said, I have now 6 to 8 months.
[Guest]: He's absolutely right.
[Guest]: Let me give it a shot.
[Guest]: Let me try.
[Guest]: Why am I saying that ki side mein karenge?
[Guest]: If I get a job, I will go for it.
[Guest]: If I get a good job.
[Guest]: I already have like a safety net now.
[Guest]: I need to give it a shot.
[Guest]: I did everything possible.
[Guest]: I reached out to like, anybody, you know, I used to blog a lot at that time on a website
[Guest]: called on a forum called Zanga.
[Guest]: So Zanga pe na logon ko, do you know anybody like, you know, in Bombay who would want to,
[Guest]: you know, hire me and here's my resume or whatever.
[Guest]: And my resume was like a lot of writing, of course, engineering college student, but a
[Guest]: lot of writing that I'd done.
[Guest]: I'd also started writing for Jam, which I think again is a rite of passage for most
[Guest]: people at that time, you know, so, and kahi na kahi after like hundreds of attempts and
[Guest]: hundreds of people, do you know, do you have a cousin in Bombay?
[Guest]: Do you have somebody who knows somebody, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Itne emails bheje maine, puri list mein, I remember like sabko, jiten logon jana tha
[Guest]: ki Bombay kuch ko jante ho, media ke andar, I tried in NDTV, I tried in MTV, I tried everywhere.
[Guest]: And then some, one of my junior's sister was working in Hindustan Times.
[Guest]: She passed on my resume to Khalid Muhammad, who was the editor at HD Cafe.
[Guest]: And yeah, I got a call and said, you know, very interesting CV, you guys want, you want
[Guest]: to come over to Bombay?
[Guest]: Can you come tomorrow for an interview?
[Guest]: I was like, I'm in Karnal.
[Guest]: So sure.
[Guest]: Immediately, shyaam ko maine, subhe aagle din flight pagdi, Bombay mein mohacha, I'd
[Guest]: add a folder of all the articles that I'd done.
[Guest]: So it's like, what all have you done?
[Guest]: I was like, yeh lo mera folder.
[Guest]: So it was young times, you know, this, that, etc.
[Guest]: So he's like, okay, great, you seem to be like young and smart, etc.
[Guest]: This is what we can pay you.
[Guest]: Yeah, you want to join?
[Guest]: I said, oh yeah, so easily.
[Guest]: And yeah, I never had to intern for whatever it's worth.
[Guest]: And next day, I joined HD.
[Guest]: And I mean, they told me literally that giving me some, you know, one week ka time diya tha,
[Guest]: the one week I'd taken.
[Guest]: Next day, I went back, came back a week later, 2008 July and joined HD.
[Guest]: But it is, it is, it is through somebody else that I realized that this should be, this
[Guest]: is what I should be doing.
[Guest]: But and I had asked my mother for that.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't tell my mother, you know, at that time that I'm going to be applying
[Guest]: to other places.
[Guest]: I said, job mili viye hai.
[Guest]: And then when I got this job, then I said, listen, so I have these two jobs, but I also
[Guest]: have Hindustan Times now.
[Guest]: And it's since it's HD, you know, and I'd also gotten jobs in two other, I'd got a job
[Guest]: in OML, I'd got a job in a PR agency called Pink Relations, I remember.
[Guest]: And so I'd got three jobs, and then I had to choose now, OML was paying me a little
[Guest]: bit more than HD.
[Guest]: Pink Relations was also paying me a little bit more.
[Guest]: But HD was HD.
[Guest]: So I was like, I mean, I can't now, Khalid Mohammed was somebody again, I read his newspaper,
[Guest]: you know, reviews.
[Guest]: I was like, if he's going to be my boss, I mean, I want to do this.
[Guest]: Yeah, I came to Bombay, and you know, it's, and it's taken me until from that time on.
[Guest]: But I think that's the first thing where again, an external circumstance and the second part
[Guest]: would be my teaching.
[Guest]: Hearing the stories of my students, you know, made me recognize that I need to introspect
[Guest]: deeper into what is my own.
[Guest]: Of course, anxiety and therapy were the big, ultimate points of transition in me recognizing
[Guest]: became like Imtiaz Ali movie character, I took a sabbatical after, you know, so one
[Guest]: of the things in therapy that after this whole conversation that I had, where she told me
[Guest]: like, I had to figure out what do I want to do after I came back from goalkeepers from
[Guest]: after that panic attack, I just came back and I decided that I realized what I want
[Guest]: to do in life.
[Guest]: I first want to quit.
[Guest]: I don't think I can do my job, you know, and I need to give myself time.
[Guest]: I need to take time to find out what is my story.
[Guest]: And I and I and I decided to just and I told this, I remember I told this to my therapist,
[Guest]: I was like, I decided I'm going to quit YRF and she's like, that's not what I told you.
[Guest]: I told you to introspect.
[Guest]: I didn't tell you to quit your job.
[Guest]: I was like, no, no, I'm quitting.
[Guest]: How can you quit YRF?
[Guest]: She was like shocked.
[Guest]: My parents, everybody was like, you are doing really well at YRF, don't quit.
[Guest]: And and I was just but I was sure that I needed to give myself some time to figure out what
[Guest]: is my story.
[Guest]: And in those six and I took and I quit and I ultimately they were very kind, YRF was
[Guest]: super kind.
[Guest]: They've always been so kind to me, but they said like, you know, you take to you instead
[Guest]: of like quitting, just take three months.
[Guest]: And after three months, you tell us, do you want to continue or don't want to continue?
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: So after two months only, I knew that I didn't want to continue, but I so I kind of scrubbed
[Guest]: off everything, left everything, left my teaching, left film companion, left YRF, left everything,
[Guest]: switched off my phone, went to Bahrain, you know, with my parents for a few months.
[Guest]: And to just and then I traveled a little bit, I kind of put a post online.
[Guest]: And that's where I think even the Yuva's idea really started.
[Guest]: I put a post online where I just told, you know, that I want to, I have quit my job.
[Guest]: I have some time.
[Guest]: I want to meet students across the country.
[Guest]: If you are in a college in somewhere, please call me.
[Guest]: I'd love to come over.
[Guest]: So college in Indore called me, a college in Bangalore called me, a college in Bhubaneshwar
[Guest]: called me.
[Guest]: And I just went in all these different places and just met students for two to three days
[Guest]: and speaking to them.
[Guest]: And after all the work, I mean, all my teaching, and I know I've not spoken much about it,
[Guest]: but teaching was the most transformative thing that has happened to me.
[Guest]: You know, it is, yeah, because I think I entered teaching.
[Guest]: I entered teaching with this idea with like that I am going to change people's lives,
[Guest]: you know, and the reason for that was also because of my time at NID Kurukshetra.
[Guest]: After a point of time when I had a full sense of my privilege, I just wanted to, for whatever
[Guest]: it's worth, I just wanted to do whatever I can to give back.
[Guest]: When I got a job, again, I'll tell you privilege ka kaise realization ho, when I got my job
[Guest]: in CSC.
[Guest]: CSC is a big company, right?
[Guest]: Like, you know, when for computer and computer students, it's a big deal.
[Guest]: And I got it very easily, like, in you know, how are these first whatever I was technically
[Guest]: proficient enough to clear technical, I was not like the best student, I was like seven
[Guest]: point something I'd gotten a seven pointer, but but it was technically decent enough and
[Guest]: smart enough to crack their test or whatever it is.
[Guest]: And then the big challenge would come in the HR round for most people, because you have
[Guest]: to be comfortable with comfortable in speaking to English and you have to comfortable in
[Guest]: the corporate structure.
[Guest]: And English to mujhe aati di and I can talk to people.
[Guest]: So the HR round was never an issue.
[Guest]: So I'd go into HR and immediately I'd get a job.
[Guest]: So two places I applied to two places I got a job in, right and CSC.
[Guest]: So I got a job and I was like, Oh, no big deal, kitti aasani se mil gayi.
[Guest]: And I remember that I'd come to my room after getting the CSC job and I was like, what,
[Guest]: you know, theek hai, I told my parents ki mil gayi job agara.
[Guest]: And I remember, there's this other guy who'd also got, you know, this job in CSC, who had
[Guest]: never really interacted with much beyond, he was in a different section, a different
[Guest]: course also.
[Guest]: And he just came to my room and he's like, tujhe CSC mil gayi, maine ka haan, he's like
[Guest]: meri bhi aayi and he burst into tears.
[Guest]: He was so emotional.
[Guest]: He's like, matlab kap se sapna dekh raha tha yeh job mil jaye CSC and he was like a nine
[Guest]: pointer and he's like mujhe itni mushkil hui thi mujhe jana hai, matlab main toh dar gaya
[Guest]: tha JD mein, PI mein, kya hoga, kya nahi hoga and I was like, what is a cakewalk for me?
[Guest]: This boy's like, gotten so emotional and I just felt like, man, you know, this shouldn't
[Guest]: be that easy for me, like, or whatever, you know, you kind of have this and I was also,
[Guest]: you know, just so you also know right now, I'd come from NRI Kota, okay, so I'm not like,
[Guest]: so I was also, I constantly aware that, you know, I am here on a seat where I'm paying
[Guest]: and all of these people have worked much harder than me to be here, whether I deserve it or
[Guest]: not is, I was always thinking, do I deserve it or not deserve it?
[Guest]: And what am I doing to make use of this seat?
[Guest]: And then I was just like, I need to give back.
[Guest]: So I started a club in my college called Aspire, where I was like, now I'm going to dedicate
[Guest]: the rest of my, after I've gotten these jobs, I'm going to dedicate the rest of my time
[Guest]: at NID Kurukshetra to teaching public speaking to, you know, or GDPI to get, you know, my
[Guest]: juniors to clear them.
[Guest]: So that's, and I, I think for six months, I just did that, like, in fact, it was so
[Guest]: sweet, like, then professors that coming to me saying, can you also involve me, I would
[Guest]: also learn to love like to learn.
[Guest]: And I'd done post masters in Bahrain and whatnot.
[Guest]: So I kind of created a structure basis that but I, that's really also where I kind of
[Guest]: realized that the joy of, of sharing, or teaching or, you know, helping out in whatever way
[Guest]: possible and using a privilege in a, in a manner where it's where someone else is benefiting
[Guest]: off of what you got so easily.
[Guest]: And even though, as I've said, it wasn't like my whole life has been a piece of cake with
[Guest]: my parents and whatnot in Bahrain and I said, a lot of bullying had also happened.
[Guest]: And at the same time, after that, it just stuck to me that, you know, this is something
[Guest]: that I want to continue doing.
[Guest]: So when I joined HT, I used to have interns, like nobody, no one knew what they were doing
[Guest]: in BMM.
[Guest]: So I just asked one of my friends, who was also a professor at Jain, who had become a
[Guest]: professor at Jain, I also want to teach because I want to teach like journalism to, you know,
[Guest]: these young people because they clearly like don't know the structure of writing or whatever
[Guest]: they come in.
[Guest]: You know, I don't want people to, I can help them.
[Guest]: So I came with this, this, this messiah severe complex that I had helped people in NID Kurukshetra
[Guest]: and now it become like, now I'm going to change the lives of the kids.
[Guest]: And because there, anybody like, when you got a job, you will get emotional calls from
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: Sir, I got a job.
[Guest]: Because we used to call seniors, sir, you know, all like, thank you for like that course
[Guest]: and that changed my life, I was hearing this and I was, my heart was getting full and I
[Guest]: was like, man, I made a difference.
[Guest]: And then I went to college in Jain college in Mumbai, and no one gives a shit about the
[Guest]: professors over there.
[Guest]: No one cares.
[Guest]: You can have like this notions and narcissistic notions of like giving back.
[Guest]: They don't want to receive.
[Guest]: They're like, screw you.
[Guest]: You are anyway three years older than us and you want to change our lives, please, bro,
[Guest]: think about yourself.
[Guest]: I used to have students come to me after my first batch, it was such a big disaster.
[Guest]: My first batch students would like message me on Facebook messages saying, like, this
[Guest]: is maybe how you should go about teaching students are advising me how to be a better
[Guest]: teacher.
[Guest]: I was like, this is and I was so like disappointed with the way the first batch went, because
[Guest]: I'd come with these really wrong notions that I want to give back that in the second batch,
[Guest]: I wanted to teach one more batch, even the teacher was, you know, like the coordinator
[Guest]: recognized I failed a little bit in the first batch, although I taught a lot of, you know,
[Guest]: which nobody cared about also, because like in a BMM batch of 30-40 students, only three
[Guest]: want to be journalists.
[Guest]: The rest of them anyway want to do other things.
[Guest]: So why am I doing news reporting to people, how do they write, what is the structure.
[Guest]: So second time, I just wanted to kind of, I was like, I'm a little bit more humility
[Guest]: and go into it with the intent of not just teaching, but also learning, not just talking,
[Guest]: but also listening.
[Guest]: And that I did not recognize at that time, but it became a it was a radical thing I ended
[Guest]: up doing without recognizing or realizing it.
[Guest]: Because what started happening is because I was so curious and eager to listen to them
[Guest]: and kind of non-judgmentally learn from them, I came off my high horse and being like, I'm,
[Guest]: you know, I'm not a teacher here, I mean, while I'm a teacher, but I'm really here to
[Guest]: listen to you.
[Guest]: I want to hear your thoughts, your opinions on, I mean, from journalism topics or what's
[Guest]: happening in the world, but like, let's chat, let's talk, here's a topic I want everyone
[Guest]: to have their voice.
[Guest]: And I'd reach out to people and say, you know, this is your voice, tell me, tell me, tell
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: And then slowly students outside of class hours would start coming to me and saying,
[Guest]: you know, thank you for just like asking me to speak up or it was tough for me, but like
[Guest]: you made it really comfortable and then would tell me other problems of their life.
[Guest]: You know, I have this issue with my parents, what do I do?
[Guest]: And I'm just like, I don't know, like, you know, so I would still give them whatever
[Guest]: little bit of advice that I could, you know, in whatever more experience I had in life.
[Guest]: But I also had a recognizing that every one of these kids would come in and talk about
[Guest]: these things that they cared about.
[Guest]: And somehow they were not talking to each other.
[Guest]: I'm like, you said a problem, you said a problem, Sonu's problem is the same, but you're not
[Guest]: talking to each other.
[Guest]: This person sits, you know, I mean, Bombay, just again, there's an ecosystem of like hierarchies
[Guest]: we've spoken about, right?
[Guest]: There's a hierarchy of how people sit in a Bombay classroom.
[Guest]: So there is a, there is a Bandra club of people who sit in, in one bunch, you know, who were,
[Guest]: who would always sit in a, and again, you know, this is, this is, this is just what
[Guest]: I saw in my classroom.
[Guest]: Also the kids from Bandra was just not interested in like, you know, journalism or news reporting,
[Guest]: you know, they were always like, in fact, I've had one of the Bandra students come to
[Guest]: me and again, I'm not stereotyping, this is just how it was in my class.
[Guest]: No disrespect.
[Guest]: But Bandra kids have come to me and said, would you like to smoke weed?
[Guest]: I'm like, I'm your professor, please can you not ask me that question, bro, do you want
[Guest]: to smoke?
[Guest]: I'm like, what are you saying?
[Guest]: First of all, you shouldn't be smoking up a second, you should not be telling me to
[Guest]: smoke up.
[Guest]: If you want to do it, do it outside the class, please don't come in the middle of the class
[Guest]: at the time of college school.
[Guest]: They were, they were, they were kids from, for example, Navi Mumbai, who would all sit
[Guest]: on the further benches, you know, Navi Mumbai and beyond.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons I started realizing, why do they, why?
[Guest]: Because they would always be late because the trains used to miss, etc. etc.
[Guest]: And they would form their own little community, which was a community of people who would
[Guest]: miss trains and then be late together, that if both of them miss, let's become friends
[Guest]: because we are from the same, they could be, one could be a Bhandar, one could be a Vashi,
[Guest]: but one couldn't be from Thane, but they would just be like, we are from the back and beyond
[Guest]: of Bombay.
[Guest]: So now this is one community.
[Guest]: There was a South Bombay community always, you know, and these were the richest kids
[Guest]: from like really rich families, they would have a language only that I wouldn't understand.
[Guest]: You know, I was like, what language is this, what vocabulary is this, what's going on?
[Guest]: They talk in ways that I would just be like, confused, like, what did you just say?
[Guest]: What does that word mean?
[Amit Varma]: Please explain.
[Guest]: Like, for example, like internet language now that has happened, right?
[Guest]: They were like the originate OGs of that language.
[Guest]: These languages have started from these subcultures of like, you know, kids who, you know, baby,
[Guest]: I don't know, man.
[Guest]: When you see whatever you're seeing in like all of these Bollywood, young Bollywood actresses
[Guest]: talk in the language, that was a language that they would communicate in.
[Guest]: And then you would have the kids from, there were always the kids from Delhi, who would
[Guest]: hate everyone from Bombay.
[Guest]: And then you would have the kids of rest of India, who would hate everyone from Delhi
[Guest]: and Bombay, and they all had their own batches.
[Guest]: And I would see it.
[Guest]: I would see it.
[Guest]: You know, that there is which are the front benchers who are just kind of like, you know,
[Guest]: the first people to try and like fit in and be like, mujhe zindagi mein jana, aagey badna
[Guest]: hai, toh mujhe pata nahi, main aagey badunga nahi badunga, but aagey baith toh sakta hoon.
[Guest]: You know, so that is their intent, whether they're topping or not topping is beyond the
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: At least they're first somewhere.
[Guest]: Then you had your backbenchers, who are there only for attendance, you know, or like, attendance
[Guest]: de do, mein soh jaata hoon.
[Guest]: That was my favorite people because they were at least they were so, you know, casual about
[Guest]: what they wanted.
[Guest]: Their ambition was, I want to just please give me attendance and don't disturb me.
[Guest]: And then the middle benchers would always be people with existential crisis, like, you
[Guest]: know, like people who just did not know where to fit, like, I don't know which group I'm
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: So I'm going to sit on the middle bench.
[Guest]: And you know, they're always there will be like four individuals sitting on the middle
[Guest]: bench, who are always like, just don't know which group.
[Guest]: So I'd see all these groups, I'll see all these communities, I'll see all these labels
[Guest]: and I'm like, kya chal raha hai yahan par na, and individual come to me and you'll talk
[Guest]: about like, this is what I'm going through, this is what I'm going through, but you're
[Guest]: not talking to each other.
[Guest]: So one day, randomly, absolutely, I remember it was it was it was raining on that it was
[Guest]: a Sunday.
[Guest]: And I used to teach on Saturday, Sundays because I was a weekend, weekdays par padha nahi sakta
[Guest]: tha.
[Guest]: Sunday ko aaye the sab log, kaafi bali shod thi us din par.
[Guest]: So I saw that nobody's like, what 75% of the class was there.
[Guest]: But I realized that not anybody's in the mood to study.
[Guest]: So I was trying to talk and then they were all talking to each other.
[Guest]: And then you know what, I was like, you know what, today, let's not pretend, you know,
[Guest]: to study or whatever.
[Guest]: I actually just wanted to, and it came out of curiosity also I said, I just want to kind
[Guest]: of know because and let's just have an honest chat.
[Guest]: I want to know that I speak to so many of you individually.
[Guest]: And then you are able to tell me all the things that you're going through.
[Guest]: But for whatever reason, I found out that you guys really judge each other, right?
[Guest]: Like you don't, you all sit in your own subgroups and your own sub, you know, sections and just
[Guest]: mingle with each other as if that's the only world that you can ever be in.
[Guest]: I mean, you have that, like what I was doing in NID Gurukshetra, I was also like, you have
[Guest]: the, you have the possibility and the opportunity to interact with people from all kinds of
[Guest]: parts of like Bombay and the rest of India.
[Guest]: Why are you not getting to know each other?
[Guest]: Why are you not, why are you creating these cliques and like talking to each other?
[Guest]: You know, people give you labels.
[Guest]: You don't have to believe them, you know, and again, I, at this time, again, I don't
[Guest]: have that understanding of gender.
[Guest]: I don't have that understanding.
[Guest]: I just have a little bit of experience from NID Gurukshetra, but I just found it very
[Guest]: irritating that, you know, that and, and, and sad that, you know, that there are all
[Guest]: of these human made ideas of who should be talking to whom people in the same class circles
[Guest]: should stay with each other, same like interest should stay with each other.
[Guest]: In fact, all my learning and all the, I mean, my favorite, my closest friend, my wife is
[Guest]: from Assam.
[Guest]: I would never have, till I was in Bahrain, I did not know, I'll be as honest in saying
[Guest]: I did not even know where Assam was on the map of India.
[Guest]: And now I'm married to a girl from Assam because of NID Gurukshetra.
[Guest]: My closest friend is from, you know, a small village in, near Chennai in Tamil Nadu.
[Guest]: And he's now in the US and working in Amazon and, and I mean, just all kinds of friends
[Guest]: that I've had from that time have come from all kinds of different places of, you know,
[Guest]: the country.
[Guest]: It's like, it's made me richer as a person.
[Guest]: And but I just feel like, you know, you guys are not using this opportunity.
[Guest]: So I just said, like, you know, for today, let's just for one minute, I want you to just
[Guest]: stop talking to each other.
[Guest]: And for some reason, they stopped, which is just like, wait, what is happening?
[Guest]: Why did you stop talking?
[Guest]: I just said, and I wanted to think for a second, who are you beyond these labels that you have
[Guest]: given yourself and what the society has given you?
[Guest]: And then come and like, talk about it.
[Guest]: What is your story beyond these labels?
[Guest]: I said very casually, I had never thought that this is a big thing.
[Guest]: And then, and then after this one minute, they all looked up, I was like, was there
[Guest]: quiet for one minute?
[Guest]: Clearly, they were introspective.
[Guest]: So I said, who wants to talk?
[Guest]: So one person first came up and like said something very like, well, I want to be a,
[Guest]: you know, even things like I just chill over here, but I want to, I'm very, I want to,
[Guest]: I used to be a cricketer.
[Guest]: But then I had some injury, couldn't play, but I want to now get into sports broadcasting,
[Guest]: you know, that's my ambition.
[Guest]: I was like, well, sure, that's not what I went by Louisville stories, but thank you
[Guest]: for coming and speaking up.
[Guest]: For whatever it's worth, that boy is a sports broadcaster today.
[Guest]: So you know, full marks for him.
[Guest]: The second boy who came, he changed my life, man, like, he came and he's this lovely, lovely
[Guest]: boy.
[Guest]: And he happened to be gay.
[Guest]: So he came and spoke to everyone and said he was very openly gay.
[Guest]: He was like someone who would, you know, be very open and comfortable with his identity
[Guest]: in college.
[Guest]: So he came and said to everyone, he's like, well, you know me as someone who's like open
[Guest]: about his sexuality and you're all like, I'm very comfortable.
[Guest]: But what you don't know about me and the story that I have beyond this label is that every
[Guest]: evening after college, on the way to home, I stop at a petrol pump.
[Guest]: He has a bike.
[Guest]: I used to go on the bike and stop at a petrol pump.
[Guest]: And then I take out different clothes that I change into so that when I go home, I have
[Guest]: to hide who I am in front of my parents.
[Guest]: Because my one truth is that I'm gay.
[Guest]: The second truth is my parents and I belong to a very religious family.
[Guest]: And in my family, it is not okay for homosexuality is not okay.
[Guest]: And in my religion, homosexuality is not okay.
[Guest]: So while here I get to be who I am in front of the people I love the most, I have to hide
[Guest]: a part of me.
[Guest]: And and then he just burst into tears when he said this.
[Guest]: And then suddenly that moment, that day, that boy changed the trajectory of my life.
[Guest]: I think I wouldn't be overstating that.
[Guest]: Because immediately after that, a wave of empathy happened in the classroom and somebody
[Guest]: becomes vulnerable.
[Guest]: And this is the thing about stories.
[Guest]: And stories lead to other stories.
[Guest]: Vulnerability is actually strength.
[Guest]: If you are if you are sharing something, it allows people to to also let their guards
[Guest]: down and share back, you know, human connection, human bonding, human friendships all happen
[Guest]: because of this beautiful thing called empathy that comes after you share your stories.
[Guest]: And this boy shared his story and everyone was like, you know, maybe I should do it too.
[Guest]: So then there is a girl who came up and she's like, she's already crying.
[Guest]: She's like, everyone thinks of me as a topper.
[Guest]: And I've topped I've topped everywhere, you know, all know me.
[Guest]: But I've topped in the college, I've topped in this district, I've been a school topper.
[Guest]: But you don't know why I top.
[Guest]: Her story is heartbreaking.
[Guest]: She's like, when I was born, I very soon found out that my parents wanted a boy and but they
[Guest]: got a girl.
[Guest]: So for some reason, my parents and especially my father has never really given me love.
[Guest]: She's like, I grew up not knowing what love is, but then kind of started recognizing that
[Guest]: with other students in school, they would get a lot of love from the parents when they
[Guest]: would do well in their exams.
[Guest]: So I was like, what if I start doing well in my exams and I'll get love from my parents.
[Guest]: She's like, from that time onwards, I'm in primary school, I've been topping everywhere.
[Guest]: I've topped school, I've topped district, I've topped college.
[Guest]: And every time I take my report card or my marks back to my father in the hope that he
[Guest]: says I love you to me, but he still hasn't.
[Guest]: And she's just in tears.
[Guest]: And as all of us are listening, and we're like, man, what is going on?
[Guest]: And just really beautiful, powerful stories started coming out.
[Guest]: Very emotionally speaking about what the world thinks of them as and who they really are.
[Guest]: And I realize at this point, man, there is there is something here that you know, something
[Guest]: happened that that day and that evening that kind of totally it started as like a 12 o'clock
[Guest]: session.
[Guest]: And then it went on to like six o'clock, like six hours, we were just talking.
[Guest]: Everybody and everybody heard everybody else.
[Guest]: Everybody gave everybody the respect of like, time and emotion and empathy and hugs.
[Guest]: There were so many hugs that day.
[Guest]: And I was like, man, what has happened?
[Guest]: And then you know, like your WhatsApp, I mean, I think the WhatsApp group after that gets
[Guest]: lit and there's so many like, emojis and like hearts and whatnot and hugs.
[Guest]: And I was like, there's something here, you know.
[Guest]: And all the people who missed it then suddenly were like, man, you know, something happened
[Guest]: yesterday, like everybody's talking about.
[Guest]: And I realized that maybe there's something that I need to do with every batch, you know,
[Guest]: this happened by mistake.
[Guest]: But it just made me so it made me realize the power of stories, power of empathy.
[Guest]: And I started I then called it started calling it the kindness project.
[Guest]: And I said, like, this is a project, the next batch I gave from the very beginning, but
[Guest]: here it happened by, you know, accident.
[Guest]: I said that at the end of the semester, I'm going to give you a project.
[Guest]: And it's called the kindness project, where I will ask you to do this exercise.
[Guest]: You have the whole semester to think about it, you can start thinking from now.
[Guest]: But I want you to tell me the story you have beyond the label that you have.
[Guest]: And I will, I'd start my class by asking how many of you want to be journalists and like
[Guest]: actually four of them would be like, I was like, great.
[Guest]: Now, all of the rest of you also have a story, why are you here?
[Guest]: And I want to know that story, but I will talk about it in the last class.
[Guest]: And I said, I'd say that it's a marked project, but I give everybody full marks.
[Guest]: And then every year, year on year on year, I mean, the kind of stories that came out,
[Guest]: it is, it became, I mean, at that time, I did not know the terms for it, but became
[Guest]: a safe space.
[Guest]: It became a space where I'm so proud to say a student of mine decided that he's going
[Guest]: to come out to the world in that space, because he didn't have an opportunity.
[Guest]: And he just came, I remember, he's just the sweetest boy.
[Guest]: And he came and he's like, said a few lines about himself and what he likes and how he's
[Guest]: as a human being, what he likes, what he doesn't like, and he ended by saying, so I just want
[Guest]: to say that I'm a boy who has brown hair, black eyes, crooked tooth.
[Guest]: And I have, you know, and I like boys, and he just said something so beautiful.
[Guest]: Everybody was like, wait, what did he just come out?
[Guest]: And it was just hugs, hugs, hugs after the other was so beautiful.
[Guest]: One of the most powerful, and I because I want to is just some one of my most inspiring
[Guest]: I think stories, one of the most powerful stories happened with this boy who, who came
[Guest]: to me and said, Sir, I don't know what to say in this, you know, class because I don't
[Guest]: have a story.
[Guest]: Everybody has a story.
[Guest]: I don't have a story.
[Guest]: So I don't know what to say.
[Guest]: So now this boy, I'll tell you what this was, he's like the brightest, one of the brightest
[Guest]: smartest kids I'd met.
[Guest]: He was so bright, he would correct me in class, he'd just be like, that's wrong.
[Guest]: This is the right thing.
[Guest]: And I was just after one time I realized that you know a lot more than me.
[Guest]: So he would ask me questions and say, you know, that you said this, but this happened
[Guest]: in 1852.
[Guest]: I said, I didn't know.
[Guest]: I have not, I have not done, you know, not studied history or, or, or even for that matter,
[Guest]: journalism or engineering, but I work in history.
[Guest]: That's why I'm teaching you, you know, so, but if you have something, I want you to talk
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: So why don't you come and tell like what happened?
[Guest]: So be my co-professor once is like asking me because I don't know, I'm very comfortable
[Guest]: with saying, I don't know.
[Guest]: So he started, so I just told him, I said, the only thing I know about you is that you're
[Guest]: very well read, crazily well read.
[Guest]: It is insane how I 2021, you know, so many things about like the world.
[Guest]: Maybe there's a reason behind it.
[Guest]: Maybe there's a story that I don't know.
[Guest]: What is the story?
[Guest]: And then his eyes just widened and he's like, Oh shit, I think I know what my story is.
[Guest]: I said, great, then come and tell it in that class.
[Guest]: So and I'd workshop with most of the kids, I would workshop these stories, then I'd be
[Guest]: like, tell me what it is, and then we'll try to get you to dig deep and say something authentic.
[Guest]: So he said, I said, he said, can I tell you, I was like, whatever you prefer, he's like,
[Guest]: can I say it in the class directly?
[Guest]: I said, sure, came to the class, he's like, so his story was, he's like, I've grown up
[Guest]: in a very misogynistic setup, very patriarchal setup, he's like, my father is a patriarch
[Guest]: of the house.
[Guest]: And he's so patriarchal that when there is that I have a sister and my mother, even when
[Guest]: he's watching TV, and the remote control is on the table in front of him, he will not
[Guest]: pick it up himself.
[Guest]: He will call my mother or my sister to come and pick it up for him.
[Guest]: He's like, it used to be so irritating to me to see and so and I used to get so angry
[Guest]: at the way he treats me and the way he treats my mother and there were different rules for
[Guest]: all of us.
[Guest]: My sister would not get to God, I'd get to God, my sister would not get a certain kind
[Guest]: of money, I'd get a certain kind of money.
[Guest]: If there's some work to be done, my sister, my mother were the ones who are being asked
[Guest]: to do the work, whereas I wouldn't be asked to do it at all.
[Guest]: And he's like, my anger turned into resentment.
[Guest]: And when sometimes my father would hit me or hit any of us, there was a day where I
[Guest]: almost hit him back.
[Guest]: And then I realized that what am I doing?
[Guest]: How can I do this?
[Guest]: I'm turning into him.
[Guest]: He's like that realization happened and I just got very scared.
[Guest]: And I was like, there has to be a better way of, you know, giving back to my father without
[Guest]: getting angry like him, because that's his thing, I don't want to be that boy.
[Guest]: So he's like, every time I would fight with him and say that, you know, you can't do this,
[Guest]: he would say, but this is the way the world works.
[Guest]: This is the way the world works.
[Guest]: This is the position of girls, boys do this, girls do that, women do this, men do that.
[Guest]: Don't fight, you know, the way the world works.
[Guest]: So he started, he just, he had Google.
[Guest]: So he went online and he's just like, is this the way the world works?
[Guest]: And then he discovered feminism and then he discovered feminist movements, then he discovered
[Guest]: communities in different parts of the world, which did not have patriarchy, but matriarchy.
[Guest]: So the next time his father would get angry and say, this is the way the world works,
[Guest]: he would hit back with a fact and say, you know what, in Northeast India, the kids take
[Guest]: the names of their mothers, you know, because it's not patriarchy, it's matriarchy, so it
[Guest]: is not the way the world works.
[Guest]: It might work in this household, but not everywhere.
[Guest]: And his father would suddenly be stumped, he'd be like, wait, what?
[Guest]: The next time he'd say, this is the way the world works, he'd be like, do you know about
[Guest]: the feminist movement over here?
[Guest]: And this is what happened here.
[Guest]: In Africa, there's a tribe, there is.
[Guest]: And he would always come back with facts.
[Guest]: And the father would just be like, I don't know what to say to this, because he was not,
[Guest]: you know, getting angry back at him, but talking in like, facts.
[Guest]: And he's like, he's like, I started doing this so much that my father, instead of getting
[Guest]: angry, would just like, go away, because he didn't know how to respond.
[Guest]: And he's like, now it's reached a place where it's not that my father has suddenly become
[Guest]: like a feminist, or, you know, is not patriarchal anymore.
[Guest]: But when he wants the remote, he picks it himself.
[Guest]: He's like, that's how much of a change it is.
[Guest]: He doesn't ask my mother and my sister to, you know, get it.
[Guest]: And I was like, man, he's like, that's my story.
[Guest]: And I'm like, insane, like, just the fact that this boy has so many facts in him.
[Guest]: Can you imagine the deep story behind that?
[Guest]: And through these stories of these young people, I started recognising that I too have a story.
[Guest]: Now, what I used to think, I used to understand, and that man thing, I never could unlock.
[Guest]: But I unlocked like, why I care about films, I told you, it's my father and stuff.
[Guest]: You know, a lot of it really, yeah, I just struggled, I knew there was something there,
[Guest]: but I just did not know what it was.
[Guest]: And then it was anxiety.
[Guest]: And then it was therapy.
[Guest]: And actually, how I also realised it is anxiety is one of my students, by the way, like, one
[Guest]: of my students has spoken about anxiety in her session.
[Guest]: So I called her one day and said, can I meet?
[Guest]: You know, and you're very close, we're very thick.
[Guest]: So I met her, you know, for lunch or something.
[Guest]: And I said that, so you said you got anxiety, just tell me like, what all happens?
[Guest]: What are the symptoms?
[Guest]: Because she was taking therapy at that time.
[Guest]: And then she told me like, this happens, this happens, this happens, this happens, this
[Guest]: happens.
[Guest]: And I was like, shit, all of this happens to me.
[Guest]: So is this is what I have also anxiety.
[Guest]: And she said, maybe it is, you should get it checked, and maybe you should go to a therapist.
[Guest]: And that's where I was like, oh, shit, I can't go to a therapist, I'm a man.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, it's in my students, it's in the conversations that I had.
[Guest]: It's in the stories of others that I found my own, you know, so and then, of course,
[Guest]: in clinical anxiety.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a powerful thought and such a powerful frame, just, you know, just thinking about
[Amit Varma]: what your story is, like what your roommate, in fact, said to you that you should be writing
[Amit Varma]: on the side, writing on the side, writing on the side, and just taking that step back
[Amit Varma]: and forcing you to think of it in terms of stories can, you know, at least make you self
[Amit Varma]: reflect.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by this talk that you gave, where there's this lovely line where you say,
[Amit Varma]: stories unite us, labels divide us, right, and I'll link it from the show notes, of course.
[Amit Varma]: But this is, you know, so particularly pertinent today, because, you know, I keep saying, it's
[Amit Varma]: almost a cliche on my show where I quote Whitman and talk about how we contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is that a lot of the way, a lot of the discourse around us is so reductive,
[Amit Varma]: where we'll reduce people down to labels and to narratives, that so and so is a liberal
[Amit Varma]: and anti-national, this is so and so, that is so and so, everywhere you're putting narratives
[Amit Varma]: of victimhood or narratives of oppression, looking at people only through that lens.
[Amit Varma]: And that is just offensive to reduce people to one particular thing over which they had
[Amit Varma]: no control, because it's often just an identity of birth.
[Amit Varma]: Another theme I often talk about on the show is the difference between the abstract and
[Amit Varma]: the concrete.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra, and she wrote a book on the memories of partition.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and in her episode, she spoke about how while collecting material for the book,
[Amit Varma]: she was sitting with a family in Pakistan, who had come over after partition, and they
[Amit Varma]: had suffered a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, they were just full of rage when those memories came and they were saying,
[Amit Varma]: Hindus are like this, Hindus are like that, Hindus are like this, Hindus are like that.
[Amit Varma]: But then they suddenly noticed that they're talking to a Hindu and they said, lekin tum
[Amit Varma]: nahi beti, tum achhi ho.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the difference between an abstract notion in the head and a concrete person with
[Amit Varma]: a story who's actually sitting in front of you.
[Amit Varma]: And when I think about what divides us today, it is abstract things like all these labels
[Amit Varma]: we pin on people.
[Amit Varma]: And it is abstract notions like nationalism and purity and culture and all of this crap.
[Amit Varma]: And but what can unite us is in the concrete, once you know somebody's story, as you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out, it is difficult to hate them.
[Amit Varma]: It is difficult because you and that's one of the things that literature and reading
[Amit Varma]: literature really helps because when you live the lives of others through, you know, getting
[Amit Varma]: inside their heads, it just gives you so much more empathy, where and it gives you so much
[Amit Varma]: more insight into yourself, where you say ki mera bhi to story hai, you know, the strength
[Amit Varma]: that I'm showing, ye bhi kisi majboori se aayi hai, kisi frustration se aayi hai, you
[Amit Varma]: know, tum itna kyu muskura rahe ho, you know, exactly that kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: So and I'll dive into the anxiety later also, because I want to do a little bit of a dive
[Amit Varma]: into that with you as well.
[Amit Varma]: But on the point of stories, your kindness project seems to me to be so powerful, because
[Amit Varma]: suddenly everybody in the classroom is a real person to every other person in the classroom.
[Amit Varma]: And that is mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And that is what our society needs. Because today, even when we talk with friends, we
[Amit Varma]: are looking inside our smartphones, and we are lost in the abstractions on the on the
[Amit Varma]: in the black mirror.
[Amit Varma]: But we are not actually, you know, looking into each other's eyes and making that real
[Amit Varma]: human connection.
[Amit Varma]: And you found a device to unlock that in a particular setting, which is a particular
[Amit Varma]: setting of a classroom.
[Amit Varma]: And since then with you, you are you've, you know, found other sort of devices like that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your thinking on this, because the world needs more of this.
[Guest]: You know, it's only in hindsight that I started recognizing why this idea of storytelling
[Guest]: and narrative became so important.
[Guest]: So again, one of the first things was my mother only, right?
[Guest]: Like I told you, I joked with you.
[Guest]: And I mean, not it wasn't a joke, but I told you about the fact that when you know, when
[Guest]: I had my first show, my mother said, like, to the MBA.
[Guest]: And one day, you know, I had a very big fight with my mother, you know, where I, where I
[Guest]: asked her, I said, okay, if I do MBA, then what will happen?
[Guest]: And she's like, then you'll be successful.
[Guest]: I said, then what will happen?
[Guest]: Because I was trying to see where, what is this idea in her head, then what will happen?
[Guest]: She is like, then you'll earn money, you'll have a lot of money.
[Guest]: I said, then what will happen?
[Guest]: Then you'll buy a household.
[Guest]: Then what will happen?
[Guest]: Then you'll buy a car.
[Guest]: Then you'll get married.
[Guest]: Then what will happen?
[Guest]: Then you'll settle down.
[Guest]: Then you'll have kids.
[Guest]: Then what will happen?
[Guest]: Then you'll bring up the kids.
[Guest]: Then the kids will go to college.
[Guest]: Then what happens?
[Guest]: Then you retire.
[Guest]: I want to know what will happen?
[Guest]: And she's like, what happens after that?
[Guest]: To khush hone ke liye mujhe retire hona badega
[Guest]: And she's just like very honestly and earnestly was like haan
[Guest]: I said aur agar mujhe abhi khush hona hai phir
[Guest]: And she's like aisa nahi hota
[Guest]: I'm like aisa nahi hota matlak kya hota hai
[Guest]: I want to be happy right now
[Guest]: She's like nahi happy nahi hota abhi tumhara bhi duties hoti hai
[Guest]: And it just and again in that moment I realized yaar
[Guest]: Not in that moment much later I think
[Guest]: Retrospective mein I kind of recognized
[Guest]: But this is what our parents were given duties
[Guest]: And that's what they thought all of us have to perform duties
[Guest]: You're not living for yourself
[Guest]: You're living for the next for the child you will birth
[Guest]: You're living for the partner you will have
[Guest]: You will live for the
[Guest]: How does how can in our country in our society
[Guest]: Anyone even find their story
[Guest]: When you are constantly told that you have to live
[Guest]: Your entire story is about somebody else
[Guest]: There is no such thing
[Guest]: And you know it's another
[Guest]: Such a random you know insight to this
[Guest]: Like when I'd gone on this SOTC tour with my family
[Guest]: There's a lot of old couples over there
[Guest]: And I was really like I was like are we not
[Guest]: I mean again 17 year old I was like where are the young people in this tour
[Guest]: Why are there so many old people etc
[Guest]: And one of them we became close to a couple
[Guest]: That's the couple that actually even asked my parents
[Guest]: So I asked them uncle aunty aap log jana
[Guest]: You know you are like well in your 60s or whatever
[Guest]: How are you why are you doing this tour
[Guest]: It's just a curious question ki kya kar rahe ho
[Guest]: He's like bete humare bachon ki shadiya hogi hai
[Guest]: You know toh humne ka chalo ab enjoy karte thoda
[Guest]: And I was like and it's the same thing my mother said right
[Guest]: Like ab shadiya hogi hai duty khatam hogi hai
[Guest]: Settle kar di hai ab hum enjoy kar sakte hai
[Guest]: So till then till your 60s you can't enjoy life
[Guest]: That is the idea that we are given to people
[Guest]: Your story is not your own
[Guest]: You are not allowed to think that you have you know
[Guest]: It's selfish, it's considered selfish to say that you know
[Guest]: Tum apne ware sochta hai, tum apne ware mein kitna sochta hai
[Guest]: If you are not sacrificing for your family
[Guest]: Then you are selfish, you are self-centered, you are egoistic
[Guest]: Tu apne ware mein hi sochta hai, tu sab ke ware mein hi sochta hai
[Guest]: Sehb apne ware mein sochta hai
[Guest]: This is why so many people who wanted to be other things
[Guest]: Now this is across gender
[Guest]: Who wanted to break out of their circumstance
[Guest]: Or break out of their narratives
[Guest]: Were just constantly told, shamed in society
[Guest]: And shamed in family structures
[Guest]: Saying that you don't care about us
[Guest]: You only care about yourself
[Guest]: Whereas this idea of a Shravan Kumar
[Guest]: This boy who took his parents on a pilgrimage
[Guest]: And did it on his own
[Guest]: That's the ideal son that everybody should have
[Guest]: And the ideal daughter is the one
[Guest]: Who finds that best Shravan Kumar
[Guest]: Kind of a boy and then serves him
[Guest]: He will serve the parents, she will serve him
[Guest]: Who is living for themselves?
[Guest]: Everybody is living for somebody else
[Guest]: The parents will live for these kids
[Guest]: Parents live for the kids, the boy has to live for the parents
[Guest]: The wife has to live for the husband
[Guest]: Then they have to live for the children
[Guest]: It's a chakra view
[Guest]: Nobody is living for themselves
[Guest]: And that is half our society's problem
[Guest]: Why is everybody angry in our society?
[Guest]: Because nobody does anything for themselves
[Guest]: They try to do it
[Guest]: Stop worrying about what everybody else wants
[Guest]: Now maybe I should think about it
[Guest]: Because my only focus in life was work
[Guest]: It was just work
[Guest]: Because I needed to make my mother proud
[Guest]: Because she raised me
[Guest]: I need to pay her back
[Guest]: In some way
[Guest]: And paying her back in my case was not money
[Guest]: Because of privilege
[Guest]: But it was in terms of pride
[Guest]: In terms of getting her to have
[Guest]: Where she could go and tell somebody else
[Guest]: Look what my son is doing
[Guest]: Look how successful my son is
[Guest]: For the community to call herself
[Guest]: Like my mother
[Guest]: It's just
[Guest]: All of us are living
[Guest]: These narratives for others
[Guest]: And nobody is actually living
[Guest]: For themselves
[Guest]: And I have always
[Guest]: I have just found this
[Guest]: Such a terrible thing
[Guest]: Such a tragic thing
[Guest]: Such a sad way
[Guest]: In which we look at our culture
[Guest]: I am not saying
[Guest]: We need to push each other away
[Guest]: And not care about our families and communities
[Guest]: Of course we must
[Guest]: But it's okay to also care about yourself
[Guest]: Self care as a concept
[Guest]: Does not exist
[Guest]: In Indian society
[Guest]: People who do self care
[Guest]: Today are called influencers
[Guest]: It's not a
[Guest]: It's not a thing that you practice
[Guest]: It's not a thing that you care about
[Guest]: Even the idea of self care
[Guest]: Right now Amit when you think about it
[Guest]: Now it comes down to
[Guest]: Going to spas or like
[Guest]: Getting a manicure pedicure
[Guest]: Or having a pool day
[Guest]: Or whatever you know
[Guest]: Even those are commodified
[Guest]: And capitalist ideas of what self care is
[Guest]: Self care is you know
[Guest]: Actually being able to spend a Sunday
[Guest]: Without having to worry about productivity
[Guest]: Self care is actually having a day
[Guest]: Only for yourself without worrying like
[Guest]: What will my you know
[Guest]: Partner, husband, son
[Guest]: Wife, family
[Guest]: Want to do or think of
[Guest]: I can't plan
[Guest]: It's been so tough for me to plan a solo trip
[Guest]: Because I have
[Guest]: My brother lives in the US
[Guest]: My parents live in Bahrain
[Guest]: My wife obviously lives with me
[Guest]: But anytime I have free time
[Guest]: I need to find a way of dividing it with the three people
[Guest]: My aunt lives in Karnal
[Guest]: I'm close to all of them
[Guest]: Whatever free time I have I'm always like
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: I need to divide it
[Guest]: My therapist tells me
[Guest]: Where is the time that you are living for yourself
[Amit Varma]: I don't know
[Guest]: But you solved the problem
[Amit Varma]: Because now they will all listen to this
[Guest]: And your aunt from Karnal will call you
[Guest]: And say you don't need to come
[Guest]: They are very sweet and they say this
[Guest]: It's not even about them
[Guest]: My parents and my mother
[Guest]: And my aunt in particular
[Guest]: My father doesn't even like
[Guest]: When he comes and meets me
[Guest]: Although again as I said he is trying now
[Guest]: But my mom and aunt have been super supportive
[Guest]: And of course
[Guest]: They also sacrifice in sending their children away
[Guest]: They say one day you go away
[Guest]: They want you to
[Guest]: Get out of and go to a different place
[Guest]: And study and work there etc
[Guest]: Even if they want
[Guest]: They don't ask their children now
[Guest]: Because sacrifice has become the whole thing
[Guest]: So there is just tons and tons of
[Guest]: Problems in the way
[Guest]: We think of all of this
[Guest]: And it's become
[Guest]: So difficult for us
[Guest]: It also comes
[Guest]: From again two other things
[Guest]: One thing again
[Guest]: Is this idea of
[Guest]: How we have constantly been
[Guest]: Compared growing up
[Guest]: Always
[Guest]: So you are
[Guest]: Again your life is a shadow of that
[Guest]: Cousin that you are competing with
[Guest]: It is always about that
[Guest]: Neighbors son or daughter that you need to beat
[Guest]: It is always about
[Guest]: You know in the group of people
[Guest]: Your parents, in a group of people
[Guest]: You have to be the most intelligent
[Guest]: So when you have these
[Guest]: When you are constantly
[Guest]: Where is the empathy lacking right now
[Guest]: The empathy is lacking
[Guest]: In our society because we have been
[Guest]: Forced to be
[Guest]: To think about our better good
[Guest]: For our
[Guest]: Families
[Guest]: So we have turned into
[Guest]: We have been
[Guest]: Pushed into individual narratives
[Guest]: So that we can
[Guest]: Make our families proud
[Guest]: So we can make our systems
[Guest]: Proud but in the pursuit of
[Guest]: That we are supposed to not care
[Guest]: About the community
[Guest]: And that's just the paradox and
[Guest]: Irony of it all
[Guest]: You are constantly told that
[Guest]: If you have to go ahead you have to go on your own
[Guest]: You have to beat it
[Guest]: You have to defeat it
[Guest]: And when you go ahead
[Guest]: And someone is left behind
[Guest]: You can't go back
[Guest]: You can't go back, fools go back
[Guest]: Fools are the ones who stop
[Guest]: Or pause or rest
[Guest]: Or who kind of, you have to constantly
[Guest]: Every bit of your time
[Guest]: Has to be commodified, you have to
[Guest]: Constantly go to the next milestone
[Guest]: In life and that's just the middle
[Guest]: Class overall thinking
[Guest]: And I am not saying that right now I am middle class
[Guest]: At all but I am just saying that that's the culture
[Guest]: That has become the middle
[Guest]: Class culture and in that culture
[Guest]: If you, and you are doing all of this so someday
[Guest]: You can also pay back to your parents
[Guest]: So for the idea of, but you are resenting everybody
[Guest]: And you are only, after a point of time
[Guest]: You become so conditioned and just moving forward
[Guest]: Moving forward, moving forward that you are not even looking left and right
[Guest]: And most people ultimately
[Guest]: Also stop talking to their parents or stop like caring
[Guest]: For their parents because they have pushed them into these narratives
[Guest]: They have become so individual
[Guest]: They are like why should I care about you now
[Guest]: While it's not true for most of the country
[Guest]: Again sacrifice is the large word
[Guest]: Which is also given as a word to burden us
[Guest]: And burden everybody with this idea
[Guest]: That you can't do something for yourself
[Guest]: So you have to do for the family
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: But in a society you have to do it for yourself
[Guest]: So you are not
[Guest]: And that's where you chip away every sense of
[Guest]: Empathy you have for anybody else
[Guest]: Or for that matter for yourself
[Guest]: And that's the largest thing, while you don't have
[Guest]: Empathy for others, you also don't have any empathy for yourself
[Guest]: You are not compassionate to yourself, you are not
[Guest]: Kind to yourself, you don't slow down, you don't think
[Guest]: Why are we, where is the question
[Guest]: About why we are doing what we are doing
[Guest]: That question is not asked in education systems
[Guest]: And when we ask questions, all in our country
[Guest]: No one is able to ask questions
[Guest]: If someone asks a question, you are shocked
[Guest]: How are you asking a question
[Guest]: Don't ask questions, keep your head down
[Guest]: Respect your elders, one other thing that I have
[Guest]: Like always had this massive
[Guest]: Why respect your elders
[Guest]: And not respect everyone
[Guest]: I am not saying don't respect your elders
[Guest]: I am just saying why is the saying not that
[Guest]: Respect everyone, it's respect your elders
[Guest]: Because of patriarchal system where you know
[Guest]: You have to respect those in power who are older to you
[Guest]: And the only
[Guest]: Allegiance you have
[Guest]: Is to be with the people in power
[Guest]: Anybody who is not in power, you can say anything to them
[Guest]: You can do anything to them, which is what we are seeing right now
[Guest]: Anybody who is marginalized
[Guest]: Is not respected, is not
[Guest]: Kind of given any bit of love and empathy
[Guest]: Because they are not elders
[Guest]: And elder is not just about older
[Guest]: In terms of experience, it's just
[Guest]: Bade, bada insaan
[Guest]: Bado ki izzat karo
[Guest]: Sabki izzat karo, kabhi zingi mein
[Guest]: If that was a society we would be living in
[Guest]: Empathetic, not divided
[Guest]: Not polarized kind society
[Guest]: Sabse pyaar rakho, izzat bhi kya hota hai
[Guest]: Izzat kya hai, respect kya hai
[Guest]: Respect itself is a, you know, why are we
[Guest]: Reducing all the emotion we need to have
[Guest]: As a society to respect
[Guest]: Pyaar ki baat karo, sabse pyaar karo
[Guest]: Wo toh hota nahi hai, izzat karo
[Guest]: And particularly for young people
[Guest]: Why is it so difficult for people to find their stories
[Guest]: Because you are constantly told that you are
[Guest]: Look at the stories of success
[Guest]: Amit, that are out there in the world, right
[Guest]: IIT mein tumh log
[Guest]: Top karte ho, ya phir jo na coaching centres
[Guest]: Mein top karte ho, tumhari hoarding lag jati hai
[Guest]: And that's how people identify, look at these
[Guest]: Four faces, and those faces will
[Guest]: Look like they are, they have been
[Guest]: All their
[Guest]: Life has been, you know, taken
[Guest]: Out of their faces, it's just miserable
[Guest]: Faces of these young people who have
[Guest]: Top 10 coaching centres, and that's how you become famous
[Guest]: Anytime you are
[Guest]: Asked, mainna TEDx's, you've seen
[Guest]: The TEDx's, I've gone and given all these TEDx's
[Guest]: And every TEDx ke baad mainna ek question
[Guest]: Poochta ho, ki jo na, I've come to your
[Guest]: Campus now, how many
[Guest]: People in your campus have been on this stage
[Guest]: They'll be like nobody, I'm saying
[Guest]: Do you, are you saying that there is not
[Guest]: A single person in your campus
[Guest]: Whose story is worthy of being told
[Guest]: On a stage like this, because
[Guest]: That's not true, every person
[Guest]: Has
[Guest]: Had a battle that they fight to reach where
[Guest]: They are, no matter what age it is
[Guest]: You can be 12, you can be 15, and you'll
[Guest]: Be fighting battles in your life
[Guest]: And sometimes, you know, especially with your family
[Guest]: And especially with your community and society
[Guest]: There are much bigger battles, the Gen Z and
[Guest]: Young people in India, they are fighting like
[Guest]: X number of battles
[Guest]: Of identity, where they are not
[Guest]: Know what their identity is, but they are not allowed
[Guest]: To live it, because we live in a conservative society
[Guest]: How can, how dare you have an identity
[Guest]: And not follow the identity we have for you
[Guest]: Because that's the narrative as parents we have, that's the narrative
[Guest]: As society we have for you, so it's a
[Guest]: And every young person thinks, maybe
[Guest]: If that is, I'm sorry I'm moving
[Guest]: From like one thing to another
[Guest]: But this idea of settle
[Guest]: This idea of settle for me
[Guest]: Is always like
[Guest]: I mean settle is also a word we are using for stable
[Guest]: But it is also a word we use for compromise
[Guest]: And I've
[Guest]: When people say settle karlo, settle karlo
[Guest]: Settle karlo, actually
[Guest]: It's not about stability, it is about compromise
[Guest]: Ki tumne na apne mission statement pura kar liye
[Guest]: Ab tum settle ho jao, settle ho jao matlab
[Guest]: After a point of time, you need to
[Guest]: You can have whatever idea you have of independence
[Guest]: But after a point of time, you have to give in
[Guest]: You have to compromise, and you have to be one in society
[Guest]: And that's called settling
[Guest]: I'm now settled, I'm
[Guest]: One of society, and now my life is
[Guest]: The same life that society
[Guest]: And culture and patriarchy has asked me to live
[Guest]: And that's the story of everybody
[Guest]: You ultimately become a
[Guest]: Large, one
[Guest]: Some nobody
[Guest]: In everybody
[Guest]: Versus having an identity of your own
[Guest]: And why is there so much anger?
[Guest]: Why has there been so much toxicity
[Guest]: Against, you know, on the internet
[Guest]: All of this, it is coming from a place
[Guest]: Where most of these people were always told
[Guest]: That your identity is like
[Guest]: A part of a collective
[Guest]: So whenever a marginalized community wants to
[Guest]: Assert their identity as an individual
[Guest]: You can't have that, how can you have that?
[Guest]: You don't get to have an identity today
[Guest]: You are not going to
[Guest]: You are not going to be able to
[Guest]: Assert your individuality
[Guest]: When I never got to do
[Guest]: You're a feminist, you can't be a feminist
[Guest]: How can you say you're a woman when we're all supposed to be
[Guest]: Part of a collective, and a collective
[Guest]: Which cannot question, which has to settle
[Guest]: And which has to follow the rules given by society
[Guest]: How can you be
[Guest]: How can you say as a Muslim
[Guest]: You require rights
[Guest]: Well, you can't have that right
[Guest]: Because, you know, as a society we have decided
[Guest]: This is the way things are going to work
[Guest]: So any right in our country
[Guest]: Is not given
[Guest]: Based on the fact that
[Guest]: Our empathy is over
[Guest]: Because our empathy
[Guest]: Was already over
[Guest]: The day we start being
[Guest]: Compassionate to ourselves
[Guest]: And recognizing that every one of us
[Guest]: Also had a story of an obstacle we've overcome
[Guest]: And give ourselves
[Guest]: That leeway, that love, that compassion
[Guest]: And say, you know what
[Guest]: We don't have to be angry about this
[Guest]: In fact, we can lean into some of these things
[Guest]: Who said that even if you're 35
[Guest]: You're 40, you're 45, you can't
[Guest]: Start your life, or do something that you've
[Guest]: Always wanted to do, who said, you'll be happier right now
[Guest]: Do it now
[Guest]: If you've never done it, do it now
[Guest]: I've never gone to, I've never exercised
[Guest]: I can get angry about like the system
[Guest]: That forced me to do this, but I'm trying now
[Guest]: Failing at it, but trying
[Guest]: I've never cared about, I mean so many
[Guest]: Different things, I've so many different things
[Guest]: At this age that I'm now trying
[Guest]: To kind of
[Guest]: You know, incorporate
[Guest]: Or inculcate, and just see how it works
[Guest]: So what if I
[Guest]: Lost, or I won't even say lost
[Guest]: So what if there's a whole time of mine
[Guest]: That I didn't do any of these things, life is very long
[Guest]: You can still do it, you can
[Guest]: Still have that Sunday that you want only for yourself
[Guest]: You can still do whatever version
[Guest]: Of self-care you call it
[Guest]: You know, whatever it is
[Guest]: You call self-care, you can still go for it, you don't
[Guest]: Have to constantly
[Guest]: Be burdened by, and
[Guest]: Shamed, and judged by
[Guest]: Society, for what your life
[Guest]: Should be like, and what your story should be like
[Guest]: It is your story, no matter what age you are
[Guest]: I say this to young people, but I'm also now
[Guest]: Saying it to anybody who's listening right now
[Guest]: It is your story, it is your narrative
[Guest]: You take back control
[Guest]: You don't have to cede that
[Guest]: Control, that you may have ceded
[Guest]: For all your life right now, and you're
[Guest]: Going to be happier for it, you're going to be less toxic
[Guest]: You're going to be less angry, you're going to hate
[Guest]: The world a little less, if you start being compassionate
[Amit Varma]: To yourself. Really wise words
[Amit Varma]: And I totally agree with you
[Amit Varma]: About, you know, group rights
[Amit Varma]: And thinking in collectives instead of thinking
[Amit Varma]: As individuals and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: And what you also say about
[Amit Varma]: Everybody having a story is so true
[Amit Varma]: The problem is that everybody has a story
[Amit Varma]: But not everybody tells it, and maybe
[Amit Varma]: Just telling yourself
[Amit Varma]: Your story, maybe nobody else
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to share it, but just telling yourself
[Amit Varma]: Your story can give you clarity
[Amit Varma]: About whether you're just living out a template
[Amit Varma]: Or whether, you know
[Amit Varma]: Is this really what you wanted to do?
[Amit Varma]: Are these the parts you really wanted to
[Amit Varma]: Go down along, and I also
[Amit Varma]: Feel so strongly about
[Amit Varma]: The last thing you said, that it's never too late
[Amit Varma]: To start all of this, you know, I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: With Kavita Rao, who's written a brilliant book
[Amit Varma]: On lady doctors, and I think she
[Amit Varma]: Mentioned in that, that her mother started learning
[Amit Varma]: The sitar at 76, and in a couple
[Unknown]: Of years she's really nailed it
[Amit Varma]: I think of authors like, one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: Novelist, Penelope Fitzgerald, who started
[Amit Varma]: Writing novels in her 60s, and won the
[Amit Varma]: Booker Prize, and just wrote great books
[Amit Varma]: And our mutual friend
[Amit Varma]: Roshan Abbas
[Amit Varma]: You know, has been educating
[Amit Varma]: Me and enlightening me on how
[Amit Varma]: People in our generation will live to 120
[Amit Varma]: And healthy lives till 120
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, he suddenly made me feel
[Amit Varma]: Like a young buck again
[Unknown]: So, and
[Amit Varma]: You know, the mention of Roshan is a good
[Amit Varma]: Way to segue into the
[Amit Varma]: Next thing I want to talk about
[Amit Varma]: Because earlier we were talking about Roshan
[Amit Varma]: And Varun, and how kind
[Amit Varma]: They both are, and kindness
[Amit Varma]: Is, you know, a
[Amit Varma]: Theme that you've spoken about a lot
[Amit Varma]: As well, not
[Amit Varma]: Just kindness to others, but kindness to
[Amit Varma]: Yourself, and kindness perhaps as a habit
[Amit Varma]: That you intentionally
[Amit Varma]: Inculcate. You know, so tell me
[Amit Varma]: A little bit about your
[Amit Varma]: Thinking in this, because
[Amit Varma]: We think of many qualities
[Amit Varma]: In our lives. We think that
[Amit Varma]: We have to be intelligent
[Amit Varma]: This has to happen, that has to happen
[Amit Varma]: We don't often think of kindness, or if we do
[Amit Varma]: We think of kindness in a context
[Amit Varma]: Of pity, where, you know
[Amit Varma]: You can feel virtuous because you are
[Amit Varma]: Helping someone by being kind, that kind of
[Amit Varma]: A self-centered kindness
[Amit Varma]: But, you have thought
[Amit Varma]: Much more deeply about it, so
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about when
[Amit Varma]: You started thinking about it, what
[Amit Varma]: The spurs were, and what other
[Amit Varma]: Directions it took you into
[Guest]: So much of my life's
[Guest]: Work has been with young people
[Guest]: And a lot of that
[Guest]: Was me being kind
[Guest]: To young people in some way
[Guest]: Or offering safe spaces to
[Guest]: Them, and a lot of that
[Guest]: Is because I didn't get it, when I
[Guest]: Was growing up. I was
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: I was
[Guest]: Bullied a lot when I was in school
[Guest]: Because I used to
[Guest]: Write, I told you, you know, in
[Guest]: Local magazines and newspapers, and people just
[Guest]: For some reason associated
[Guest]: That with narcissism
[Guest]: Or just
[Guest]: Had this idea that I am some kind of an
[Guest]: Asshole who gives opinions
[Guest]: Has opinions and gets them published
[Guest]: You know, I've said it in one of my talks
[Guest]: But like, it used to get so bad
[Guest]: To me that, you know, I remember
[Guest]: That I'd be in a
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: An assembly
[Guest]: A school assembly, and I'd
[Guest]: Be standing at the back, and I used to
[Guest]: Take part in a lot of extracurricular activities
[Guest]: So if I win something, and my name is called
[Guest]: The whole school would boo
[Guest]: I'd just go from the back to the front
[Guest]: And there's like booing, boo, and I'm like a
[Guest]: 14 year old kid at that time, just
[Guest]: Hearing all of this, and just being like, what is
[Guest]: Why do people
[Guest]: Need to be so unkind, right?
[Amit Varma]: Sounds like Twitter, your school assembly
[Guest]: Man, it was Twitter before Twitter
[Guest]: Like, I used to have physical
[Guest]: Trolls, forget like, people used
[Guest]: To put in, I used to write, so I
[Guest]: There was a newspaper called GDN
[Guest]: Gulf Daily News, it used to
[Guest]: Print letters to the editor, and after
[Guest]: Young Times, I was also, I was so excited
[Guest]: That my Young Times is getting published
[Guest]: Which is a young magazine, I should also do it in a newspaper
[Guest]: And I started writing these newspapers
[Guest]: Letters, and
[Guest]: Very quickly, like everybody in Bahrain came to
[Guest]: Know me as like this
[Guest]: 14 year old who writes
[Guest]: Letters for newspapers, because they
[Guest]: Started publishing my age, so
[Guest]: Because my ID was
[Guest]: Nikhil is cool 1986
[Guest]: You know, for whatever it's worth
[Guest]: The first ID that I ever
[Guest]: Made, and Nikhil is
[Guest]: Cool is what I used to
[Guest]: Think of myself back then, but 1986
[Guest]: Was something that the publishers then kind of
[Guest]: Reached out and said, are you 14, and I said
[Guest]: Yeah, and you know, and it just kind of
[Guest]: They put 2 and 2 together, and they started publishing the age
[Guest]: Which they have not published for anybody else
[Guest]: Like, so it was just a weird thing that
[Guest]: You know, they decided that they are going to publish
[Guest]: My age, which kind of made me
[Guest]: A target of like
[Guest]: All kinds of people who would have other
[Guest]: Opinions to me, right, who would just
[Guest]: Be, and my opinion at that time was
[Guest]: 14-15, I was writing about world politics
[Guest]: In my head, I was like, oh, I know everything
[Guest]: And I do admit there were stupid opinions
[Guest]: And, and, but whatever
[Guest]: It is, yeah, it's a 14-year-old writing, which is
[Guest]: Also what I see right now, it's young people writing, it's
[Guest]: Okay, allow us to be stupid, even if
[Guest]: My opinion wasn't fully formed, at least I had
[Guest]: An opinion and I was trying to form one
[Guest]: You know, instead of encouraging, you are
[Guest]: You know, and as I said, people were
[Guest]: Trolling on
[Guest]: Purpose, you know, like trolling in the sense
[Guest]: And as I said, like, you know, at that time, imagine
[Guest]: The effort, not everybody had email
[Guest]: Computers were a privilege, people
[Guest]: Were writing actual letters, letters were
[Guest]: Being written and envelopes, they
[Guest]: Were put in and people would go to post
[Guest]: Offices to post them and then somewhere
[Guest]: A publisher would receive it and there
[Guest]: It would be written, Nikhil is an idiot, how dare Nikhil
[Guest]: Say this, Nikhil is so stupid, why is a 14
[Guest]: Year-old writing opinions, and I'm like, where do you
[Guest]: Have so much free time? That's very committed trolls
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, exactly, so I'm saying, I've seen that
[Guest]: When I was so young, you know, and I
[Guest]: And, and, and then because of me
[Guest]: Brother started getting bullied, people started coming
[Guest]: My younger brother, people started hitting him in school
[Guest]: You know, because, okay, you are Nikhil's
[Guest]: Brother, this slap, yeah, I was like
[Guest]: This is, so I just
[Guest]: I remember one day I was playing cricket and somebody came
[Guest]: And threw a ball on me, when I was bowling
[Guest]: I was like, who's thrown this ball and turns out it was not a ball
[Guest]: It was a stone, then suddenly more rocks
[Guest]: Came and thrown on me and they were screaming
[Guest]: Nikhil Dhanjay, age 14, you're an asshole
[Guest]: I'm like, what did I do? I don't even know
[Guest]: What I did, I just wrote
[Guest]: Opinions, why is that such a
[Guest]: And whatever that opinion may be
[Guest]: Whatever you may think of me
[Guest]: Beyond that, you know, as
[Guest]: A pompous narcissist was writing this opinion
[Guest]: Why would you hate me so much?
[Guest]: I just didn't get it, why is there
[Guest]: So much unkindness, and I ran, I mean, I didn't
[Guest]: I mean, I decided after 10th
[Guest]: This happened in 9th and 10th, then 10th
[Guest]: At the end of 10th, I decided that I'm going to
[Guest]: Leave Bahrain, I'm going to go
[Amit Varma]: To India and I'm going to do my further studies there
[Amit Varma]: What was your answer to that
[Guest]: Rhetorical question, why do they hate me?
[Guest]: I'll tell you that, I'll come to that
[Guest]: So, so, so
[Guest]: I decided to leave India
[Guest]: Sorry, leave Bahrain, and came to India
[Guest]: Tried to get into
[Guest]: DPS, DPS rejected me saying your marks are not
[Guest]: Good enough, and then I got an admission
[Guest]: In Mayo College, Ajmer
[Guest]: And they were really like, they had seen my work
[Guest]: That I had done in young times, immediately in the interview
[Guest]: Around only said you're going to be the editor of our, you know
[Guest]: I was like, cool, this is a place that gives me
[Guest]: Respect, here I'll get everything, etc
[Guest]: But, I remember
[Guest]: Admission was done
[Guest]: Everything was good, next morning
[Guest]: My parents are going back from Ajmer
[Guest]: To Karnal and then
[Guest]: To Bahrain, and
[Guest]: And in the night
[Guest]: This is one of those things, you know, that kind of happens
[Guest]: That I just prayed to God the first time, I was like, I don't know
[Guest]: I know I've got an admission, but I started
[Guest]: Really feeling like, as if I'm
[Guest]: Running away from my
[Guest]: You know, I was like, is this going to be my story
[Guest]: Is my story going to be of the boy who ran away
[Guest]: Because he was hated upon
[Guest]: That cannot be my story, and I don't
[Guest]: And I was trading in
[Guest]: Two years more with my
[Guest]: Brother, with my family, with my brother
[Guest]: Because of getting
[Guest]: Bullied, I was like, and then it was too
[Guest]: Late, because I just got an admission, my parents
[Guest]: Had paid the advance and what not, and I
[Guest]: Prayed to God in the night, I was like, I don't know
[Guest]: What happens, but tomorrow I just want to go back
[Guest]: To my parents, I didn't have the courage to tell
[Guest]: Them, but I prayed to
[Guest]: God, do something, and next
[Guest]: Morning, I don't know, this is
[Guest]: One of the places where you believe the universe
[Guest]: Actually listens or whatever, because next morning
[Guest]: My parents had a conversation
[Guest]: With the Dean, and the Dean
[Guest]: For whatever reasons, I don't know if there's anyone
[Guest]: From Mayo College that may have listened to this, just
[Guest]: Scared the shit out of my parents as if
[Guest]: Like this is going to be jail, they said like
[Guest]: He said things like, you know, so
[Guest]: You know, your kid
[Guest]: Is overweight, he's going to get bullied a lot
[Guest]: And you know, a lot of
[Guest]: Kids have also tried to like harm themselves
[Guest]: Just tell him not to harm himself, because that's okay
[Guest]: It happens, you know, it's a boy's school, you're going to
[Guest]: He's going to get used to it, it's like, what
[Guest]: They're like, so obviously
[Guest]: He has a mobile phone, he has good shoes
[Guest]: You know, it might also get stolen, but that's also okay
[Guest]: Don't worry about it, he will get to call
[Guest]: For 30 minutes, and
[Guest]: Sometimes when, you know, you know
[Guest]: Boys also do play pranks, they
[Guest]: Make sure that you're not able to call for the
[Guest]: 30 minutes in a week, not in a day
[Guest]: You know, so if you don't hear from him in 2-3 weeks
[Guest]: That's okay, my mother was like
[Guest]: What are you, is this jail or is this a school
[Guest]: He's like, no, at the end of it, you'll be disciplined and he'll be
[Guest]: A gentleman, but like this is how his life is going
[Guest]: To be here, you get used to it, he'll get
[Guest]: Beaten up, he'll get bullied, people will steal his things
[Guest]: You know, we will
[Guest]: You know, the PT instructors will make him thin
[Unknown]: In the next 3-4 months, you know
[Guest]: So don't worry about that, but yeah
[Guest]: You're putting, the commitment is 2 years later
[Guest]: He's going to be a gentleman, and my parents
[Guest]: Are like, bro, what's going on
[Guest]: They just had like, they talked to each other immediately
[Guest]: Afterwards, and they looked at me
[Guest]: And I was like, acting innocent as if
[Guest]: Like, oh cool, I have no problem
[Guest]: And then my mother just told my father, I don't think we should
[Guest]: Make him stay, and then they asked me, what do you think
[Guest]: Would you be comfortable going back? I said, yeah
[Guest]: Actually, I don't mind, you know
[Guest]: And then my parents just
[Guest]: Like, just that day we were, I was like
[Guest]: Dude, what is this miracle that has happened
[Guest]: 6 months I had to homeschool
[Guest]: And at the end of 6 months
[Guest]: I went back for my second semester
[Guest]: In 11th standard, I had taken science at that time
[Guest]: So I went back and I remember the first day
[Guest]: Back in the bus, I was very nervous
[Guest]: After I had gone with all the hate and so many people
[Guest]: Hated me, and I went and
[Guest]: The school was fine, everything, nobody
[Guest]: Like, even remembered or bothered
[Guest]: Or whatever it is, everybody was being nice to me
[Guest]: And then I kind of like, one of my
[Guest]: First epiphanies at that time was
[Guest]: I get it, you know, I am in science
[Guest]: And the thing about science
[Guest]: Students is, they hate themselves so much
[Guest]: They don't have the time to hate anybody else
[Guest]: And it's all the people who used to hate me
[Guest]: Have gone to commerce, so I was like
[Guest]: I am in science now, I am like, no one
[Guest]: Cares, everyone is sad in their life, I didn't even
[Guest]: Think about it, until one day
[Guest]: I was in a bus
[Guest]: And this
[Guest]: Science friend of mine, who
[Guest]: Had just made friends with recently
[Guest]: Just kind of spoke to me
[Guest]: And said, you know, so
[Guest]: You were here, and in 6 months you were not here
[Guest]: Like, what happened, where did you go
[Guest]: And now, sometimes
[Guest]: You are waiting for someone to ask you a question
[Guest]: That you can like, offload on
[Guest]: So, the bus took
[Guest]: One and a half hours to get, one hour it would
[Guest]: Take from our school to our home, I said
[Guest]: One hour, come sit, I will tell you
[Guest]: So I offloaded fully, I said
[Guest]: This is what happened, I got bullied
[Guest]: Threw stones at me, this, that
[Guest]: And now then, I decided to come back, and now
[Guest]: I am here, now he heard the whole
[Guest]: Thing, and then this boy is just like, I am so sorry
[Guest]: I am like, why are you sorry
[Guest]: It's not like you have done something, and laughed out loud
[Guest]: And then this guy just looks at me
[Guest]: And says, actually I have
[Guest]: I am like, what have you done
[Guest]: And then he says
[Guest]: Well, out of the many letters that were written
[Guest]: Against you, I had written a
[Guest]: Bunch of them
[Guest]: And I am really confused, I am like
[Guest]: First of all, I was like
[Unknown]: You are from science, how could you do this
[Guest]: So first my thing was, you are a science
[Guest]: Student, how can you do this
[Guest]: But my second thing was like, you didn't know me
[Guest]: I have just come to know you
[Guest]: Why would you hate me when you didn't know me
[Guest]: And then his answer was
[Guest]: Actually that only
[Guest]: Well, I hated you, because
[Guest]: I didn't know you, and I am like
[Guest]: I heard this
[Guest]: And again, the thoughts in my head
[Guest]: At this point, I am trying to process what has happened
[Guest]: And I just, in my head
[Guest]: I am like, I have lost 6 months of my life
[Guest]: I homeschooled in Karnal
[Guest]: I stayed away from my parents
[Guest]: Because there was no homeschooling in Bahrain
[Guest]: So I did coaching for 6 months in Karnal
[Guest]: I stayed away from my parents for 6 months
[Guest]: We spent all of this money
[Guest]: Going to India, Ajmer, coming back
[Guest]: My brother got bullied, I got bullied
[Guest]: Mental health, I didn't know what mental health was
[Guest]: But I know that I was obviously hurting
[Guest]: And after all of this
[Guest]: This boy is just saying
[Guest]: I hated you because I didn't know you
[Guest]: And he was saying, I am sorry
[Guest]: So in my head, I wanted to punch him
[Guest]: That was the first thing I wanted to do
[Guest]: I was like, f**k you for saying that
[Guest]: You think sorry is going to cut it
[Guest]: But somehow
[Guest]: Or the other, again this is just an incident
[Guest]: That has
[Guest]: Just stayed with me so much
[Guest]: Because in that moment
[Guest]: I had the greatest epiphany
[Guest]: Of my life, which is what I have also said
[Guest]: In those talks that
[Guest]: I realized that this boy
[Guest]: After he came to know my story
[Guest]: He kind of
[Guest]: Had empathy for me
[Guest]: And just somewhere I connected
[Guest]: That, well
[Guest]: So if you know someone's story
[Guest]: You can't hate them
[Guest]: If you know someone's story, you can't
[Guest]: Misunderstand them
[Guest]: If you know someone's story, you can't be angry at them
[Guest]: If you know someone's story
[Guest]: You can't reduce them to labels
[Guest]: Which is what this boy had done to me
[Guest]: And I asked him further, why did you do it?
[Guest]: You didn't know me
[Guest]: He was like, I just had an assumption
[Guest]: After I read your articles, I thought you were this narcissist
[Guest]: This pompous a**hole
[Guest]: I was like
[Guest]: Because you used to write 14 years old
[Guest]: I was like, why do you need to tell your age
[Guest]: Why do you need to tell everybody
[Guest]: Show off that you are 14
[Guest]: And on the basis of that
[Guest]: You thought that I deserved hate
[Guest]: I'm sorry man, I mean I've come to know you
[Guest]: You are a really nice guy
[Guest]: Now that I know you, I really wanted to say sorry
[Guest]: So just the fact at that time
[Guest]: That this boy actually decided
[Guest]: He could have never told me
[Guest]: But the fact that he decided to tell me
[Guest]: And apologize to me
[Guest]: Just in that moment
[Guest]: I kind of
[Guest]: I think my understanding of kindness happened
[Guest]: That you know
[Guest]: Stories bring empathy
[Guest]: Stories make you kind
[Guest]: If you hate each other
[Guest]: There is no chance that you can hate each other
[Guest]: And that kindness
[Guest]: Is
[Guest]: Again I said
[Guest]: For whatever reasons from childhood
[Guest]: I was always like, I'm going to be the opposite of what
[Guest]: Has hurt me
[Guest]: I'm going to be the opposite of what has pained me
[Guest]: So if I got bullied
[Guest]: I'm going to be kinder to everybody around me
[Guest]: If I got hate
[Guest]: I'm going to give as much love as possible
[Guest]: If there are people who have looked down on me
[Guest]: I'm not going to judge anybody
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: In my early years, in my job
[Guest]: Even when I was at MTV
[Guest]: I was the youngest person in almost every team
[Guest]: At that time
[Guest]: And it was very hard
[Guest]: People would
[Guest]: I told you I was making a show
[Guest]: At 24, 25
[Guest]: Now they gave me the title of producer
[Guest]: At 25
[Guest]: Created by 25
[Guest]: And said that you make it now, you do it on your own
[Guest]: I had never done this
[Guest]: I said I need help, and then they got help for me
[Guest]: But the help
[Guest]: That came
[Guest]: Were people who were just like
[Guest]: If I would tell them that this is what I want to do
[Guest]: You are 24, what do you know
[Guest]: We have spent 15 years in the industry, you don't tell us what to do
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: I would see the show that I had written
[Guest]: That they had asked me to produce
[Guest]: Or asked me to lead
[Guest]: I'm supposed to be the boss of that show
[Guest]: The creator of that show, the showrunner of that show
[Guest]: But at every situation
[Guest]: Between the ages of 24 to 20
[Guest]: It took 2 years for the show to be back and forth
[Guest]: Back and forth
[Guest]: At the end of it, I had become
[Guest]: Like a really angry version of myself
[Guest]: Because anytime I would try to put my point of view
[Guest]: People would just say shut up
[Guest]: You are too young to have a say
[Guest]: And again
[Guest]: I went through anxiety
[Guest]: Again at that time without realizing what it is
[Guest]: I was really angry, I was really unhappy
[Guest]: And then when
[Guest]: I got the opportunity to make these 6 films
[Guest]: And now that
[Guest]: I decided that
[Guest]: Now if I am going to be with
[Guest]: Work in any situation
[Guest]: I am only going to work with good people if I can
[Guest]: And I am only going to be kind
[Guest]: Whatever anybody has given to me, I am going to be the opposite of that
[Guest]: And every time I tried that
[Guest]: It was just absolutely amazing
[Guest]: As an experience
[Guest]: We are making a film, we are making content
[Guest]: We have come away, we have already fought
[Guest]: All of these battles
[Guest]: To get here
[Guest]: And now why are we making this medium also toxic
[Guest]: Just be nice to each other, how difficult is that
[Guest]: It just became
[Guest]: One of the most important tenets for me
[Guest]: Kindness
[Guest]: There is no
[Guest]: And I just don't
[Guest]: Buy into this idea that you have to be an asshole
[Guest]: To be successful and I was always like
[Guest]: I am going to prove it, no matter what happens
[Guest]: I am going to be kind, I am going to be empathetic
[Guest]: And I am going to be successful, now you tell me what you are going to do
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: You say that I can't
[Guest]: And Yuva is a for profit, it's not a non-profit
[Guest]: We work on like social impact
[Guest]: But I wanted to say, I was like I am going to make
[Guest]: Make something on social impact
[Guest]: To tell that you know social impact
[Guest]: People look down
[Guest]: They call NGO
[Guest]: A vibe
[Guest]: When I first started talking about it, people looked down
[Guest]: As if NGOs are bad things, I am like NGOs are saving the world out there
[Guest]: You know but
[Guest]: If you start an NGO, there is nothing we can do with you
[Guest]: I am like
[Guest]: First of all, NGOs are not bad, second of all
[Guest]: Why are you looking down on anything that has to do with social impact
[Guest]: Who says that it is going to be
[Guest]: The most boring, we are the most vibrant
[Guest]: 26 people, all the average
[Guest]: Of 25, the most vibrant office
[Guest]: Till 7
[Guest]: 7.30 people work
[Guest]: Weekends we have off, Saturday Sunday
[Guest]: We don't work, we have work life
[Guest]: Balance and we are a team of 26 people
[Guest]: And we are hitting like X number of crores
[Amit Varma]: Of revenues every year now
[Guest]: You even take weekdays off, like you have been here all day
[Guest]: Exactly, it is a Wednesday
[Guest]: I am able to do this
[Guest]: And it is because it is possible
[Guest]: It is possible
[Guest]: You can be kind
[Guest]: You can have a culture of like
[Guest]: People supporting each other
[Guest]: And in fact it is going to work a lot better for you than
[Guest]: Any other culture
[Guest]: People always are looking to
[Guest]: We are no person is an island
[Guest]: Like we are all here
[Guest]: To make social bonds
[Guest]: Then why the unkindness
[Guest]: Have to be so hateful and so negative
[Guest]: And try the other thing
[Guest]: And it is hard, I am not saying kindness is not hard
[Guest]: In many situations it is hard
[Guest]: But I have found that when you persevere through those hard
[Guest]: Situations, now on the other side is just
[Guest]: Enormous amount of love
[Guest]: When you persevere through
[Guest]: The struggle, through the anger
[Guest]: Through the hate, there is nothing but
[Guest]: Love, compassion, happiness, hugs
[Guest]: Empathy, all kinds of good things
[Guest]: It is hard initially
[Guest]: Absolutely, but if not us then who
[Guest]: And now then when, it is as simple as that
[Amit Varma]: In a beautiful talk you gave on this subject
[Amit Varma]: You also spoke about
[Amit Varma]: How the internet can have the opposite effect
[Amit Varma]: Like you have got this great line
[Amit Varma]: The more connected we get the more disconnected we get
[Amit Varma]: And you also pointed out
[Amit Varma]: How the meanest person on the internet
[Amit Varma]: Gets the most retweets
[Amit Varma]: The snarkiest person on the internet gets the most likes
[Amit Varma]: And that is exactly
[Amit Varma]: What happens because
[Amit Varma]: Typically what we see on social media is
[Amit Varma]: You are online
[Amit Varma]: You want a sense of community and belonging
[Amit Varma]: The easiest place to get it is
[Amit Varma]: You join an ideological tribe
[Amit Varma]: Incentives are you want to raise your status within that tribe
[Amit Varma]: Easiest way to do so is
[Amit Varma]: Attack people on the other side, never engage with
[Amit Varma]: Argument, just attack
[Amit Varma]: Attack people on your own side for not being pure enough
[Amit Varma]: And it just becomes
[Amit Varma]: So incredibly
[Amit Varma]: Ugly and toxic and the opposite
[Amit Varma]: Of kind and in a sense
[Amit Varma]: It is not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: Their fault, like sometimes I think that
[Amit Varma]: The internet empowers the worst people
[Amit Varma]: But other times I think that
[Amit Varma]: There is no one called the worst people, everybody contains
[Amit Varma]: Multitudes, these are incentives
[Amit Varma]: Towards bad behaviour
[Amit Varma]: You know so just thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: What incentives could be there towards
[Amit Varma]: Kindness instead
[Guest]: I am
[Guest]: Going to now tell you
[Guest]: Like a little
[Guest]: Well of course I have held this opinion for a while
[Guest]: But they solidified
[Guest]: After the UR Roadshow
[Guest]: UR Roadshow just for context
[Guest]: I kind of went
[Guest]: You mentioned this right
[Guest]: When I started UR and this is after my
[Guest]: Sabbatical, my 6 month thing that I took
[Guest]: Off after YRF and I was just like
[Guest]: Okay I need to find out what my story is
[Guest]: And at that point of time I
[Guest]: I knew that
[Guest]: You know I wanted to work with young people
[Guest]: Because I really, that was my safe space
[Guest]: Honestly working with students, beautiful
[Guest]: And my skill set and my understanding
[Guest]: My passion is storytelling and
[Guest]: A skill is also that
[Guest]: How do I bring together
[Guest]: My care and
[Guest]: You know for young people
[Guest]: My passion of like
[Guest]: Storytelling and empathy
[Guest]: And my skill set of you know
[Guest]: Media and entertainment and bring it all together
[Guest]: And UR really was born out of that
[Guest]: With the two intents, one was
[Guest]: Can we make important things interesting for young people
[Guest]: That's like our core
[Guest]: You know goal and the second thing is how can
[Guest]: How can we make young people
[Guest]: Feel less alone, which is my hypothesis
[Guest]: After my you know
[Guest]: Kindness project I realized every young person
[Guest]: Has a lot to say but there's very few people
[Guest]: Willing to listen, every young
[Guest]: Person has so much inside of that
[Guest]: The kind of stories I've heard during the
[Guest]: Kindness project you know about
[Guest]: I mean about attempted
[Guest]: Suicide, about domestic violence, about
[Guest]: And not just negative like
[Guest]: You know the really positive stories
[Guest]: Someone who's you know overcome drug addiction
[Guest]: You know someone who's and every story
[Guest]: In fact would end up with hope you know
[Guest]: So I saw that there is a young generation
[Guest]: Of young people, a generation of young people
[Guest]: That's lonely and I want to go
[Guest]: A little bit deeper into the loneliness actually
[Guest]: Just for a second before I go into the roadshow
[Guest]: When
[Guest]: We were growing up you know
[Guest]: With all of us you know every generation
[Guest]: I think before this current generation
[Guest]: Grew up in a time where we were
[Guest]: Told, as I said we've discussed that you know there's stories
[Guest]: That were given to us, structures that were given to us and we
[Guest]: Believed these structures because
[Guest]: How else, what else
[Guest]: Would we do, how would we, what is the reason for us
[Guest]: To not believe, even if we had an inkling
[Guest]: That these structures don't work for us
[Guest]: We just didn't know better right
[Guest]: There was, you were a certain
[Guest]: Community, your identity was
[Guest]: You know me
[Guest]: My people, my community
[Guest]: My gender, whatever it is
[Guest]: And you know just structures that you were told
[Guest]: That you have to live in this
[Guest]: There is only straight as a sexuality
[Guest]: There is only your religion
[Guest]: As a religion, that's important
[Guest]: And that means everything to you
[Guest]: There is, you can only marry this kind of a person
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Sorry, you can only
[Guest]: Study in a certain kind of a
[Guest]: You know, certain kind of a course you have to
[Guest]: And certain milestones that you have to
[Guest]: Achieve after which you settle and whatever right
[Guest]: Those were the communities that
[Guest]: Everyone without having
[Guest]: A choice in found themselves, now the good
[Guest]: The tough part
[Guest]: About that was these communities were
[Guest]: Always unhappy in some ways
[Guest]: Purely because you know not
[Guest]: Everybody was leading a narrative that was given to them
[Guest]: But at the same time they were
[Guest]: Communities, so you still had
[Guest]: That you know bubble
[Guest]: And that you know where you can
[Guest]: If soft landing was there
[Guest]: Even if you felt there was people to catch you
[Guest]: Now what the internet did
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Was first and foremost
[Guest]: And for this generation, let me come to this generation
[Guest]: First and foremost because of
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: If for me as a millennial growing up
[Guest]: I did not know what my, I am trying to find
[Guest]: My identity in a world before the internet
[Guest]: And a world post the internet, before the internet
[Guest]: I have told that this is life
[Guest]: And after the internet I just go and google
[Guest]: And I have just been told that life is not like that
[Guest]: Life can be lived in many ways
[Guest]: First I have to choose
[Guest]: What do I believe more, do I believe what my parents told me
[Guest]: And my society told me or do I have to believe the internet
[Guest]: And then lots of people have made different choices
[Guest]: I chose to believe that the internet
[Guest]: Should be somewhere in the middle
[Guest]: That my parents are also half right and the internet also has the other half
[Guest]: But there are choices
[Guest]: I believed in like
[Guest]: Pre-internet Karan Johar
[Guest]: You know Karan Johar once said
[Guest]: You know in kuch kuch hota hai hum ek baar jeete hain
[Guest]: Ek baar marte hain, shadi bhi ek baar hoti hain, pyaar bhi ek baar hoti hain
[Guest]: Mere maan liya tha
[Guest]: Mere zindagi mein yeh hi tha, ek baar jeenge, ek baar marte hain, ek baar shadi karenge, ek baar pyaar karenge
[Guest]: I had one girlfriend in college
[Guest]: If she wouldn't have left me
[Guest]: I would have married her
[Guest]: Then in college I made another girlfriend
[Guest]: She is now with me for 16 years
[Guest]: We have been together
[Guest]: Since 16 years
[Guest]: Because I genuinely believed that
[Guest]: Now at some point in time tinder happened
[Guest]: And then like a lot of people who may be married
[Guest]: I mean I must have
[Guest]: I have already gotten married when dating happened
[Guest]: But I am saying for a lot of people it would have just become a choice
[Guest]: I could have been with a partner for 8 years
[Guest]: Not married and suddenly I get
[Guest]: This plethora of options
[Guest]: And all these choices that I have
[Guest]: And now with these choices I have to choose
[Guest]: Do I want to now with all these options available
[Guest]: Do I want to swipe right constantly
[Guest]: I choose and say
[Guest]: This is my life, I understand why these options exist
[Guest]: I understand they can be helpful
[Guest]: But I have made my decision, I love this person
[Guest]: And I am going to stay with this person
[Guest]: And I don't want to look out or do anything
[Guest]: My choice that I have made
[Guest]: But with Gen Z, there are multitudes of choices
[Guest]: That you get at a very early age
[Guest]: So what that also means is
[Guest]: Good thing wise, you can choose an identity immediately
[Guest]: There are 20 identities
[Guest]: And you are just like, you know what
[Guest]: My parents say straight but I have googled
[Guest]: And there is LGBTQ and I think I belong there
[Guest]: And that's a community for me
[Guest]: And I am going to belong to that community
[Guest]: Parents might say that you have to only become an engineer
[Guest]: And then you say, you know what
[Guest]: I have seen a YouTuber becoming very successful
[Guest]: So ok let them say what they want to
[Guest]: Maybe I negotiate a little bit and I will on the side
[Guest]: Start becoming a YouTuber
[Guest]: Putting up vlogs etc and suddenly if I hit 1 million
[Guest]: Go and tell, look at the money I am making
[Guest]: 100 times more than an engineer will get in their first job
[Guest]: So then my parents won't say anything
[Guest]: So suddenly all of these choices have given power
[Guest]: Suddenly all of these choices have given like you know
[Guest]: A lot of, but at the same time on the other end
[Guest]: Of it, these choices have also been very
[Guest]: Have become
[Guest]: It's become a paralysis when you have too much choice
[Guest]: When there is, when you have
[Guest]: If you choose one person
[Guest]: With a dating app
[Guest]: Swipe right, you are matched
[Guest]: Suddenly you have another choice of another
[Guest]: While the first sign of a problem
[Guest]: In your relationship in that person
[Guest]: In your back of your head you are like
[Guest]: But I have more choices, I have
[Guest]: I can swipe right again, so
[Guest]: Where I have in 16 years had
[Guest]: Thousands of ups and downs in my own
[Guest]: Relationship with the one person that I have been in
[Guest]: There are thousands of relationships
[Guest]: That you know, one day
[Guest]: Two day or whatever, I am just as an example
[Guest]: Exaggerating, but thousands of options
[Guest]: Of relationships that you have, you can have
[Guest]: Different bad days with different people
[Guest]: But you are not going to stick to anyone because
[Guest]: There is always another option and then
[Guest]: If you choose somebody
[Guest]: It has to be, it's a choice that you maybe make
[Guest]: After like 20 failures and you are just like
[Guest]: I have to choose somebody and whatever and then maybe again
[Guest]: You settle for a different reason, so it's a
[Guest]: Choice has been a really tough thing
[Guest]: Identity, finding an identity
[Guest]: And finding communities
[Guest]: For that identity has been a little bit of an obstacle
[Guest]: Because again, internet gives you
[Guest]: Identity but in your offline world your parents are
[Guest]: Telling you this identity doesn't work
[Guest]: If you want to be whatever
[Guest]: Even let's talk about feminism only
[Guest]: Let's talk about a girl who
[Guest]: Now knows that when her
[Guest]: Mother says that I don't want to
[Guest]: I want you to cook and the girl says
[Guest]: Well I am not going to cook
[Guest]: And as I said I think everyone should
[Amit Varma]: Learn to cook
[Guest]: But if she says I don't want to cook because you cook
[Guest]: And I don't want to be the idea
[Guest]: Of stereotype of a woman and I don't want to cook
[Guest]: Because I have to feed it to my husband
[Guest]: So I don't want to learn right now, you can't say this
[Guest]: Now the mother will get angry
[Guest]: That I have to do it all my life
[Guest]: You come to me and ask me to cook
[Guest]: But when I ask you to cook
[Guest]: You are not doing it, what kind of feminism is this
[Guest]: Why do I have to be in the kitchen and make food for you then
[Guest]: And the kid is like
[Guest]: You don't be in the kitchen but she is like now I don't have an option
[Guest]: Who is going to feed you
[Guest]: Now it has become those things where the parents
[Guest]: Are also getting angry at all of this
[Guest]: In your offline world
[Guest]: You can be whatever
[Guest]: You can have a sense of your identity but your families
[Guest]: And parents will not allow you to have that
[Guest]: Not allow you to exercise that identity
[Guest]: The story of that boy that I told you
[Guest]: Who is gay in public but in private
[Guest]: He has to be you know straight
[Guest]: Because his family doesn't
[Guest]: Look down upon that, judges him for that
[Guest]: So what do these kids do, they find safe spaces
[Guest]: On the internet, they try to find
[Guest]: Communities on the internet because they are lonely
[Guest]: And that loneliness is
[Guest]: Eating everybody, where there was a generation
[Guest]: Gap that always existed in every generation
[Guest]: And this generation has become a communication
[Guest]: Gap because of the different vocabularies
[Guest]: These people have
[Guest]: My parents and I for whatever it was
[Guest]: Spoke in Hindi
[Guest]: She would speak in Punjabi and I would speak in Hindi
[Guest]: And there is one language
[Guest]: Of communication, even anger is the same
[Guest]: Language, the language of communication
[Guest]: For this entire generation is emojis
[Guest]: It is memes
[Guest]: It is you know DMs
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: Internet lingo which is
[Guest]: And you can say that you know that's just words
[Guest]: And that's just internet culture but that is their life
[Guest]: That's how they communicate with each other
[Guest]: When you are sad right now
[Guest]: And again I am not saying this as like a
[Guest]: I am not making fun of this
[Guest]: But when a young person today is sad
[Guest]: It's more likely that they will take a picture of themselves
[Guest]: With tears and send it to a friend
[Guest]: And say I am sad like this
[Guest]: Versus earlier when I would you know
[Guest]: Either call my friend and I don't know
[Guest]: I mean I haven't cried too much, I have not done that
[Guest]: As a man but I would call my friend and just
[Guest]: Talk for some time or I meet someone
[Guest]: And say I am feeling bad, let's go for a walk
[Guest]: Let's go for a walk
[Guest]: If I was stressed I would just say let's go for a walk
[Guest]: And we would go and walk across the streets of Bahrain
[Guest]: You know and that is how we would reconnect
[Guest]: I am not saying it doesn't happen right now but it doesn't happen as much
[Guest]: And the way that most people communicate
[Guest]: Even their deepest darkest
[Guest]: Emotions or the toughest emotions
[Guest]: They have is through this internet
[Guest]: Language so you don't even
[Guest]: They don't have a vocabulary to express how they are feeling
[Guest]: Because of the internet today
[Guest]: And that is but anytime
[Guest]: They would express themselves why am I
[Guest]: Sad because my mother is
[Guest]: You know my parents are patriarchal and I am not
[Guest]: Allowed to you know
[Guest]: Live the life that I want to, your parents will not understand
[Guest]: That language, that's another language
[Guest]: You are talking the language of labels which is
[Guest]: Important for you to understand
[Guest]: And be aware of but your parents will not
[Guest]: Understand that, you are talking to them in a very
[Guest]: It's alien to them
[Guest]: So when this divide keeps getting bigger
[Guest]: You are not able to talk to
[Guest]: The people who are closest to you
[Guest]: Who mean the most to you, who have
[Guest]: Raised you and given you love
[Guest]: And that's not the primary community
[Guest]: Which was your parents
[Guest]: Is getting more and more distant because of this
[Guest]: Because of the internet in good and bad
[Guest]: Ways, you look for this community online
[Guest]: And when you go online
[Guest]: You either find positive community sometimes
[Guest]: Or you find other communities
[Guest]: And when you are lonely you just want anyone
[Guest]: Who will accept you and that's what's happening
[Guest]: Right now, there are people out there
[Guest]: Who recognize this or people out there
[Guest]: Who are channelizing the loneliness
[Guest]: In xyz ways and that
[Guest]: Anger and that
[Guest]: Need to find something
[Guest]: That gives me, you know
[Guest]: Where I feel less lonely
[Guest]: And now for a lot of
[Guest]: Again, now coming to the Yuva Roadshow
[Guest]: When I
[Guest]: So as I said, with Yuva
[Guest]: When I started, one of the most important things I wanted to do
[Guest]: Was create a platform that listens to young people
[Guest]: And when you are listening to
[Guest]: And I said this
[Guest]: Before and I will say this again that you know
[Guest]: I want to be a company that sits in Bombay
[Guest]: And says we listen to young people
[Guest]: Because I have taught 8 people in
[Guest]: Whatever, x number of 100 people
[Guest]: In Jai Hind College
[Guest]: I want to, I can't say I represent India
[Guest]: I am calling it Yuva, I am calling it a Hindi name
[Guest]: I am calling it like
[Guest]: When Yuva was named because Yuva has
[Guest]: Pretty much been co-opted as an angry word
[Guest]: By most political parties
[Guest]: Yuva Sena and Fist and what not
[Guest]: And I wanted to say that Yuva can also be heart
[Guest]: You know and that is what I saw in my students
[Guest]: And so we thought that we are not going to
[Guest]: Sit in Bombay and decide like
[Guest]: And say that we know young people, we are going to go across the country
[Guest]: So between
[Guest]: 2019 and 2020
[Guest]: I went to over 120 colleges, I went to
[Guest]: I went to 35 cities
[Guest]: I went to IITs
[Guest]: IIMs, AIIMs, NIFTs, NITs
[Guest]: You know all kinds of colleges
[Guest]: Government colleges, you know English speaking
[Guest]: Hindi speaking, regional speaking colleges
[Guest]: And just I spoke
[Guest]: About gender, mental health and
[Guest]: Stories and then I just
[Guest]: Created these spaces where I ask people now
[Guest]: I have told, I was vulnerable
[Guest]: With them, I said this is what I
[Guest]: This is my story, now I want to hear yours
[Guest]: And here is what happens
[Guest]: I mean it was the same kindness project
[Guest]: Except that when kindness project I had 6 months to
[Guest]: Earn the trust of my students for them
[Guest]: To open up in the safe space that I have
[Guest]: Whereas over here I had like 1 hour
[Guest]: You know and in 1 hour I had to
[Guest]: Say certain things for them to want to open
[Guest]: Up in front of me and again I was doing it
[Guest]: You know now when I look back also
[Guest]: Sometimes I just feel like
[Guest]: I know as a teacher that I have
[Guest]: I have an understanding of young people
[Guest]: I think I have the empathy to be able to hear them
[Guest]: But I am not a trained professional
[Guest]: And maybe the next time I do it I would want a trained
[Guest]: Professional with me and you know
[Guest]: Because yeah
[Guest]: I just feel like maybe I should
[Guest]: I didn't think of it at that time
[Guest]: But having said that
[Guest]: My intent was always to kind of just have
[Guest]: These people open up because I felt like
[Guest]: Not everyone has
[Guest]: Even therapy is a privilege, you don't have access
[Guest]: Everybody doesn't have access to therapy
[Guest]: You tell a young person go and take therapy
[Guest]: At the very least
[Guest]: 250,000 rupees for a session
[Guest]: And if you are doing 4 sessions
[Guest]: You know 1000 rupees that's not affordable for
[Guest]: In a month not affordable for most Indian students
[Guest]: So in that situation
[Guest]: What do they, where do they
[Guest]: If they have to express what do they do
[Guest]: And my thing to them was
[Guest]: Talk to each other and listen to each other
[Guest]: Lead with listening
[Guest]: Care about the stories of the people around you
[Guest]: But like let's create that safe space first
[Guest]: And then you guys create it among yourselves
[Guest]: Which has happened and I'll come to that
[Guest]: But when you give young people a safe space
[Guest]: So same kind of kindness project stories
[Guest]: Beautiful stories I'll love to kind of tell you one
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: The larger thing
[Guest]: That came out was
[Guest]: As I said with
[Guest]: Girls it was when given a safe space
[Guest]: To talk about anything they choose to talk about sexual harassment
[Guest]: Because that's the most pervasive
[Guest]: Thing in their life unfortunately that's a
[Guest]: Tragedy of a country at the same time
[Guest]: As I said before they would
[Guest]: Immediately after that story they would talk about
[Guest]: Well that's the girl because of
[Guest]: Which you know I'm here
[Guest]: Today and I've survived and who's been my comfort
[Guest]: It's a tribe it's a sisterhood
[Guest]: It's the support group
[Guest]: That girls have formed with each other
[Guest]: They would talk about harassment they would talk about body issues
[Guest]: They would talk about everything like you know girls have been
[Guest]: Shamed into being a certain way
[Guest]: You have to be fair you have to be thin you have to whatever
[Guest]: Fit into an ideal for a boy that you will
[Guest]: Ultimately marry but there are other
[Guest]: Girls who are helping them cope with this
[Guest]: And that's how they survive right
[Guest]: With boys which I initially found
[Guest]: Shocking but now unsurprising
[Guest]: The biggest thing they would talk about
[Guest]: When given a free space and a
[Guest]: Safe space was loneliness
[Guest]: Boys in engineering colleges
[Guest]: Non-engineering colleges coming up to me
[Guest]: Coming up in among
[Guest]: 150 students and talking about how
[Guest]: They are doctors
[Guest]: Boys coming up which
[Guest]: Scared the hell out of me
[Guest]: Young boys coming up and saying
[Guest]: I didn't want to be a doctor
[Guest]: But my family forced me and now I'm here
[Guest]: But everyday I'm depressed
[Guest]: I don't want to do this
[Guest]: But I will have to because my parents are doctors
[Guest]: Their parents are doctors so now I have to be one
[Guest]: You know and I'm hearing
[Guest]: This across I don't know who to
[Guest]: Talk to I feel sad
[Guest]: But when I tell it to my friends they judge me
[Guest]: They say are you a girl
[Guest]: You know or if I told
[Guest]: There's a boy who said you know in one of the cities
[Guest]: Said that well I had a girlfriend who dumped me
[Guest]: Because I used to cry and she said I want
[Guest]: A man I don't want
[Guest]: Like someone like you who's cry baby
[Guest]: They were
[Guest]: There's a boy who spoke about the fact that
[Guest]: You know well I
[Guest]: I don't want to objectify women
[Guest]: But I have a group where they all do it
[Guest]: And then the moment I speak about
[Guest]: This they say that
[Guest]: Then you f**k off from this group
[Guest]: And then I ultimately did f**k off and I lost my
[Guest]: Friends and I don't know now
[Guest]: You know how do I
[Guest]: What do I do I just
[Guest]: Maybe I have
[Guest]: My moral is intact
[Guest]: But I've lost my friends so there is
[Guest]: And so many boys
[Guest]: You know the thing that
[Guest]: In 2019 especially
[Guest]: In the second roadshow I did two
[Guest]: In the second roadshow
[Guest]: The thing that just kind of
[Guest]: Shocked me by surprise was the number of young people
[Guest]: And young boys would come up to me
[Guest]: To ask for a hug
[Guest]: So many boys would come up to me and just say
[Guest]: Can I have a hug
[Guest]: And when I'd ask them sure I'd say sure
[Guest]: And give them a hug and then say why did you ask
[Guest]: Their answer was well
[Guest]: I have never got one
[Guest]: My parents have never
[Guest]: Given me a hug
[Guest]: No one has said I love you to me in my life
[Guest]: Before
[Guest]: I don't know where to find
[Guest]: You know love or acceptance
[Guest]: These were the answers that I was getting
[Guest]: And that's what's
[Guest]: Happening
[Guest]: Offline
[Guest]: Now these same people and this is where
[Guest]: I will tell you over the next two years when I followed
[Guest]: I followed back a lot of these kids
[Guest]: A lot of these kids
[Guest]: I saw that a bunch of the boys that I spoke to
[Guest]: Who were lonely were moving
[Guest]: Towards anti-feminist
[Guest]: And right-wing
[Guest]: Groups on the internet
[Guest]: Especially with all the protests that happened
[Guest]: They started commenting on
[Guest]: I remember this one really
[Guest]: I wrote a post about this
[Guest]: Fake news organization on Instagram
[Guest]: And this one boy who used to follow me
[Guest]: Who I met in Gujarat or somewhere
[Guest]: I don't know
[Guest]: Maharashtra only I think somewhere
[Guest]: Very sweet kid
[Guest]: Told about loneliness
[Guest]: Gave a hug etc
[Guest]: At the end of this
[Guest]: To talk against me
[Guest]: The group, the fake news
[Guest]: Organization wrote
[Guest]: Against me and said this guy is an idiot
[Guest]: And this guy who I was
[Guest]: Still following wrote on that post
[Guest]: Saying that well this guy Nikhil
[Guest]: Is a snake and when he came to my
[Guest]: College I thought as much
[Guest]: But I didn't say it
[Guest]: At that time
[Guest]: You were in front of me
[Guest]: Crying and asking me for a hug
[Guest]: And this is what you are saying
[Guest]: On the internet. Now I of course did not
[Guest]: You know say screw you or like I don't
[Guest]: You know whatever
[Guest]: But I was just, this is what's happening
[Guest]: These kids are lonely
[Guest]: There is no way to address their loneliness
[Guest]: There is no safe space created for them
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: In the worst impulses
[Guest]: You know especially when
[Guest]: They don't have anywhere to go to and anywhere to fit in
[Guest]: They are finding these identities
[Guest]: And that's what's happening to the world
[Guest]: You have been constantly asked
[Guest]: You know you are so lonely
[Guest]: Because there are narratives that you have to follow
[Guest]: When you try to fight those narratives
[Guest]: You are pushed back against a wall
[Guest]: So with the internet
[Guest]: At least you don't have to worry about
[Guest]: Finding someone offline because you are like
[Guest]: I am not getting community offline, I don't want your community
[Guest]: But online I am going to find
[Guest]: The folks who are
[Guest]: Who give me
[Guest]: The respect
[Guest]: Of being heard
[Guest]: You know whatever I may say
[Guest]: And a lot of these communities
[Guest]: Are just angry communities
[Guest]: There is a
[Guest]: Someone who is very close to me
[Guest]: Very very close to me, who I have lost
[Guest]: In fact I made a film called Tasali Se
[Guest]: You know on this
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: Who I think I have lost to
[Guest]: Someone who I was very close to because
[Guest]: Who has blocked me on all platforms because he said
[Guest]: You have become too liberal
[Guest]: Because this kid, he is my age
[Guest]: But he has gone the other way
[Guest]: And he is just constantly sharing hateful
[Guest]: Posts and when I kind of
[Guest]: Commented and said you know why are you doing this
[Guest]: And just after a point
[Guest]: He blocked me and said like
[Guest]: Stop your liberal bullshit
[Guest]: And I was just asking why you are being so hateful
[Guest]: But I know his background
[Guest]: And I know he has been lonely all his life
[Guest]: He has been a single child, he has never
[Guest]: Fit in, he had a lot of problems growing up
[Guest]: You know and
[Guest]: In different ways, lot of issues
[Guest]: Which I don't want to get into but
[Guest]: I know that this guy never fit in
[Guest]: Anywhere and now he has found a
[Guest]: Community, he is friends with
[Guest]: The lot of the right wing
[Guest]: You know, influencer people
[Guest]: He is in a very big position right now
[Guest]: And he is friends with a lot of these people
[Guest]: I see him following them, they are following him back
[Guest]: But he has found a community that now gives him that
[Guest]: Respect
[Guest]: Which is what everybody in our country
[Guest]: Is ultimately looking for
[Guest]: Respect the elders, how will I grow up?
[Guest]: By joining the biggest
[Guest]: Most loud, most vocal
[Guest]: Most angry
[Guest]: Community online
[Guest]: And social media has
[Guest]: Incentivized this
[Guest]: And there is this book that I was telling you about
[Guest]: Chaos Machine that I am reading right now
[Guest]: It's just Max Fischer
[Guest]: Fascinating, fascinating, fascinating book
[Guest]: About how
[Guest]: It's like the movie Social Dilemma
[Guest]: But like a book but much much worse and much much more
[Guest]: Detailed and he is given like a report
[Guest]: A reportage of how
[Guest]: Social media
[Guest]: Systems in trying to
[Guest]: In trying to maximize
[Guest]: Their profits created
[Guest]: Self
[Guest]: Self coding
[Guest]: Algorithms, AI algorithms
[Guest]: That ultimately
[Guest]: Started pushing people to extremes
[Guest]: I stopped, I used to be
[Guest]: Very active on Twitter
[Guest]: I have stopped being very active, I have stopped giving my opinions
[Guest]: I used to give a lot of opinions, a lot of threads
[Guest]: A lot of people on Twitter know me through my thread
[Guest]: I don't do it anymore because I realized that
[Guest]: I was also
[Guest]: Just honestly only seeing negativity
[Guest]: Everywhere, ever since I
[Guest]: Stopped doing that, you know
[Guest]: And I started like retweeting like
[Guest]: Wholesome stuff, started retweeting
[Guest]: Movie stuff, the only suggestions that I get
[Guest]: Now are all related to stuff
[Guest]: Which is fun and passion, but the moment I was
[Guest]: Talking about opinion, my opinion would be out of empathy
[Guest]: But the suggested posts, the suggested
[Guest]: People are all angry, angry, angry
[Guest]: Angry, angry
[Guest]: Because that is the thing that emotional
[Guest]: Responses are what
[Guest]: The algorithms figured
[Guest]: Are the way to get people
[Guest]: To retweet or share or stay
[Guest]: There for the longest time
[Guest]: And the algorithms have now
[Guest]: Pulled our world in different directions
[Guest]: Where even if, and there was this
[Guest]: Incredible, one of the big
[Guest]: Parts of the book which is just incredible
[Guest]: Learning was, so these
[Guest]: Researchers did this
[Guest]: Whole study, bunch of researchers
[Guest]: On YouTube, where they did this study
[Guest]: Where they said like, if I just
[Guest]: Start
[Guest]: A trending, I click on a trending video
[Guest]: On YouTube, and then just
[Guest]: Let it autoplay, how much
[Guest]: How many videos before I
[Guest]: Get a conspiracy video or an extremist
[Guest]: Video, and the answer was 5
[Guest]: After 5
[Guest]: Autoplay videos, even if you are
[Guest]: If you have scrubbed clean, you are on a
[Guest]: New YouTube channel, you have just seen a
[Guest]: Trending YouTube video, it's the 6th video is an extremist
[Guest]: Or conspiracy video, and after that
[Guest]: Every video is a, which you
[Guest]: Dive deeper and deeper and deeper into conspiracy
[Guest]: And when you've created
[Guest]: AIs and you've created, you know
[Guest]: Not man-made
[Guest]: Platforms, that
[Guest]: And people have figured this, you know
[Guest]: Amit, you would know
[Guest]: This, having spent so much of your time
[Guest]: Online, all the people who are
[Guest]: You know, opinion
[Guest]: Generators and you know
[Guest]: On the internet, they figured it
[Guest]: How is giving an opinion your
[Guest]: Entire identity, and
[Guest]: How is that every opinion, you have an opinion
[Guest]: On every topic in the world, and every
[Guest]: Time you have something nasty to say about it
[Guest]: Because that is how you get engagement
[Guest]: That is how you get more views, that is how
[Guest]: You stay relevant, and that becomes your identity
[Guest]: You are not getting
[Guest]: Any bigger, you know one of the
[Guest]: I had gone to the
[Guest]: Such a random thing, I had gone to
[Guest]: The partition
[Guest]: Museum in Amritsar
[Guest]: It was, it's a deeply
[Guest]: Like emotional place, and again
[Guest]: As someone whose family is shifted
[Guest]: In the partition, I was always like
[Guest]: What are my roots, and that's also maybe one of the
[Guest]: Reasons my misfit thing has
[Guest]: Always been there, but
[Guest]: I was shocked to see
[Guest]: That two or three of the
[Guest]: Gifts to that museum
[Guest]: Came from
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: The nastiest
[Guest]: Angriest
[Guest]: People on
[Guest]: Twitter, I'm not going to name
[Guest]: Them, but like
[Guest]: Everyone knows them, and
[Guest]: The moment you go there, you are just like
[Guest]: It's almost two and two together
[Guest]: It's almost like, oh now I get why
[Guest]: She's so, I've said it's a
[Guest]: Woman, but now you get why it's
[Guest]: This person is so angry
[Guest]: All the time, especially against
[Guest]: Marginalized folks, because there's clearly
[Guest]: A, there's a letter there, there's
[Guest]: All the things that were robbed of this person
[Guest]: During the partition from their grandparents, and that's
[Guest]: Generational hate that she's carried
[Guest]: Through it now, so you see
[Guest]: That starting point, and now you see
[Guest]: What it has become, but
[Guest]: Earlier where for the longest time this person
[Guest]: Wasn't speaking about it, the moment the internet
[Guest]: Started incentivizing this
[Guest]: Everyone says that
[Guest]: We were always like this, we were always all hateful, I
[Guest]: Don't agree, I
[Guest]: Disagree very strongly
[Guest]: We are not even
[Guest]: Realizing how we are being gamed by
[Guest]: Online system, when you go offline
[Guest]: And you meet the same people in offline
[Guest]: Settings, you could have the
[Guest]: You can have the
[Guest]: Absolute, and this happened in the second
[Guest]: Roadshow for me, lot of kids who later would
[Guest]: Troll me, I've met them offline
[Guest]: They are the sweetest kids who have
[Guest]: Genuine problems, and I don't hold it against
[Guest]: Them, what their online identities have become
[Guest]: Right now, and I know when I
[Guest]: Go back and meet them the next time, they were still going to be
[Guest]: Nice and kind to me, but on the internet
[Guest]: They're incentivized to be
[Guest]: You know, assholes
[Guest]: Because, you know, the moment
[Guest]: You do that, there are many other people
[Guest]: Who laugh, who say ha ha ha
[Guest]: Who might retweet, and then suddenly you realize
[Guest]: This is my identity, I can, through this
[Guest]: I can get more clout
[Guest]: But ultimately it comes down to loneliness
[Guest]: We are all extremely lonely
[Guest]: Because of everything that's happening
[Guest]: In our society, our country, our
[Guest]: Gender, our, you know
[Guest]: The narratives that we have been told
[Guest]: And we are all trying to find ways
[Guest]: Of feeling less alone
[Guest]: And unfortunately
[Guest]: The internet and social media has
[Guest]: Incentivized
[Guest]: Anger as the way to do that
[Guest]: And find communities of anger
[Guest]: That help you feel less alone
[Guest]: And that toxicity
[Guest]: Is now turning threatening
[Guest]: And, you know, dividing countries, dividing
[Guest]: Families, dividing people
[Guest]: Apart, but I don't
[Guest]: Because I have a little bit of self-awareness
[Guest]: I'm still going to try
[Guest]: And not judge the person who's
[Guest]: Hating me, I'm not saying that
[Guest]: I'm going to take that hit
[Guest]: Because now after a lot of times, I mean for a very long time
[Guest]: I was also trying to talk back
[Guest]: But you realize the conditioning now has gone so
[Guest]: Extreme, this
[Guest]: Talking doesn't help at all, so now
[Guest]: I restrict people, I don't want to block them
[Guest]: Because again that gives them a certain satisfaction, they might
[Guest]: Come back again, because that's also
[Guest]: Incentivization, I got to this person
[Guest]: So instead of blocking I might just restrict, the people might just
[Guest]: Constantly keep commenting, I don't bother
[Guest]: On that, I might mute
[Guest]: People, I may not bother on that
[Guest]: But I don't judge them and I don't look down
[Guest]: On them, I just feel sad for
[Guest]: You know, what is
[Guest]: Our communities and what our society
[Amit Varma]: Has become right now
[Amit Varma]: So a few points I want to comment
[Amit Varma]: On before my next question and one is
[Amit Varma]: One thing that strikes me that you've said
[Amit Varma]: That many feminist thinkers
[Amit Varma]: Have said on the show before
[Amit Varma]: Is the fact that women have the sisterhood
[Amit Varma]: And men have nothing equivalent
[Amit Varma]: Of that, so if
[Amit Varma]: You know, so women can show solidarity
[Amit Varma]: In different ways and find
[Amit Varma]: Comfort in that, while men
[Amit Varma]: Are essentially atomized and all
[Amit Varma]: Alone and you know, so
[Amit Varma]: What do you do, and as far as
[Amit Varma]: This rudeness is concerned, like one of the
[Amit Varma]: Things that astonishes me and I wonder
[Amit Varma]: How people don't think about it a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: Is that you are behaving
[Amit Varma]: Constantly in ways that you would
[Guest]: Never do offline, absolutely
[Guest]: Absolutely, like for example
[Amit Varma]: You and I could be at a party
[Amit Varma]: And I could say something stupid
[Amit Varma]: Right, but you are not going to call
[Amit Varma]: Five other people and then point
[Amit Varma]: To me and say that Amit just
[Amit Varma]: Said and quote unquote and Amit is a
[Amit Varma]: Moron and Amit is this
[Amit Varma]: And that's a quote tweet
[Amit Varma]: It just happens all
[Amit Varma]: The freaking time and it just
[Amit Varma]: Boggles my mind, I mean I block for rudeness
[Amit Varma]: To matlab, if you've been rude to me
[Amit Varma]: Or my friend or even a stranger, I see any
[Amit Varma]: Rudeness, I just block
[Amit Varma]: But you know, there
[Amit Varma]: For the grace of the flying spaghetti monster go I
[Amit Varma]: Because you know
[Amit Varma]: The incentives are like that, right
[Amit Varma]: And I actually believe
[Amit Varma]: That these are vocal minorities
[Amit Varma]: That
[Amit Varma]: There's a silent majority out there which is
[Amit Varma]: Not like that, we just
[Amit Varma]: Stay silent because why do you want to get into
[Amit Varma]: Trouble, but which kind of stays
[Amit Varma]: Chill and that kind of gives me hope
[Amit Varma]: But my other question to you is about
[Amit Varma]: Something that you've said in your talks and
[Amit Varma]: That I want to explore one particular
[Amit Varma]: Nuance of which is you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: Out that what people in Gen Z
[Amit Varma]: Have in common, all of them pretty much
[Amit Varma]: The one thing they have in common is
[Amit Varma]: That they're digital natives
[Amit Varma]: But within that there's a further nuance
[Amit Varma]: Divided into various tribes
[Amit Varma]: By random algorithmic
[Amit Varma]: Choices in the sense
[Amit Varma]: That you imagine a 16 year old
[Amit Varma]: First time he got a phone
[Amit Varma]: Someone sends him a video of some
[Amit Varma]: Conspiracy theory thing
[Amit Varma]: And he watches that
[Amit Varma]: All the recommendations will be based on that
[Amit Varma]: Until he enters that and that is his
[Amit Varma]: World and he knows no other world
[Amit Varma]: And he thinks that everyone
[Amit Varma]: Who is too liberal like you and me
[Amit Varma]: Is evil, you know
[Amit Varma]: Everyone who disagrees is either
[Amit Varma]: Ignorant or they're plotting
[Amit Varma]: They're anti-national
[Amit Varma]: And you for no real fault
[Amit Varma]: Of your own, you get trapped
[Amit Varma]: Into these sort of
[Amit Varma]: Into these bubbles, into these echo
[Amit Varma]: Chambers and beyond
[Amit Varma]: The point, it is not as if
[Amit Varma]: Social media intended this
[Amit Varma]: You are putting algorithms out
[Amit Varma]: There to maximize engagement which is
[Amit Varma]: Rational for them and somehow it has
[Amit Varma]: Led us here, right
[Amit Varma]: And you know what is
[Amit Varma]: Your sense of this because
[Amit Varma]: You've interacted
[Amit Varma]: With so many young people like you just mentioned
[Amit Varma]: You've interacted with people who
[Amit Varma]: Were perfectly decent
[Amit Varma]: And perfectly good and good human beings
[Amit Varma]: You talk with stories when you meet them
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: Six months later they're part of this
[Amit Varma]: Crazy tribe and then that makes you wonder
[Amit Varma]: That is talking possible
[Amit Varma]: Are we forever going to inhabit
[Amit Varma]: This world full of narrative battles
[Amit Varma]: Where we are always looking
[Amit Varma]: Into our phone and fighting with someone
[Amit Varma]: And giving in to the ugliness
[Amit Varma]: Or have you also seen
[Amit Varma]: Signs of movement the other way
[Amit Varma]: That talking can help, that interacting
[Guest]: In the concrete can help
[Guest]: This is a great question
[Guest]: For me to talk about a few stories
[Guest]: From the roadshow and I'll tell you how
[Guest]: Stories have
[Guest]: So there's and I'm sure that he's also going to listen
[Guest]: To this podcast because he listens to
[Guest]: Everything that I kind
[Guest]: Of speak on
[Guest]: So there's this kid I met
[Guest]: In a college in Gujarat
[Guest]: On day one of
[Guest]: This is the day one of the roadshow because we've not had
[Guest]: Anything
[Guest]: I spoke about labels, I spoke about
[Guest]: And it was just
[Guest]: It was one of those times where you know
[Guest]: So it was the first college and like
[Guest]: Just things had gone amiss in the
[Guest]: Communication, first ever roadshow
[Guest]: You guys, zero followers
[Guest]: On Instagram at this point, our idea was
[Guest]: On the roadshow we will start Instagram
[Guest]: And get people to follow us
[Guest]: So no one knows what
[Guest]: This is, people don't have that context of me
[Guest]: Also but whatever, I go and
[Guest]: Because of one miscommunication no one
[Guest]: Turns up in the first college, it's just like
[Guest]: There were six kids who stay back to be like
[Guest]: Okay, you know
[Guest]: The committee that was supposed to
[Guest]: Have other people, so they're like
[Guest]: They left but we will listen to you
[Guest]: Six people, so
[Guest]: I said okay, there are six people so I'll talk to them
[Guest]: I talked for an hour
[Guest]: Then I said now I want to hear you and one of
[Guest]: One of the boys and this boy is like this tall
[Guest]: Kid wearing a biker jacket
[Guest]: Who starts crying
[Guest]: Now there is everybody
[Guest]: Looking at him
[Guest]: And staring at him
[Guest]: And they're staring in almost like
[Guest]: Disbelief, it's not like
[Guest]: And I'm like, you're his friends
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: At least give him a hug or support
[Guest]: I can see that they're a bit wary of doing that
[Guest]: So then
[Guest]: I asked this kid
[Guest]: Why are you crying?
[Guest]: You know, would you like to share?
[Guest]: And this
[Guest]: Boy says that
[Guest]: You know you were right about labels
[Guest]: There is a label that I have
[Guest]: That I've given myself
[Guest]: And the world has given me
[Guest]: But I want to tell I'm not that label
[Guest]: I'm beyond that
[Guest]: It's like what is this label?
[Guest]: It's a label of a bully
[Guest]: And I said okay, go on
[Guest]: He's like, well I bully people
[Guest]: I've bullied my friends
[Guest]: That's why they're not coming to me because they know I bully
[Guest]: You know, I bully my juniors
[Guest]: But I want you to know that I'm not a bad person
[Guest]: I'm like
[Guest]: You know, I understand, I get it
[Guest]: You know, and you don't have to tell me
[Guest]: But if you know this, why do you bully?
[Guest]: And then he said his story
[Guest]: And it's just a bit of a trigger warning here
[Guest]: You know, that it is
[Guest]: Not something that everyone
[Guest]: It'll be tough for some people to listen
[Guest]: So he tells me his story and he tells me that
[Guest]: About 8-9 years ago
[Guest]: When he was younger as a kid
[Guest]: He was molested by one of his father's
[Guest]: Closest friends
[Guest]: And because he was a boy
[Guest]: He was just
[Guest]: Like, how can I ever tell
[Guest]: Anybody about this
[Guest]: You know, and he's like
[Guest]: Also this
[Guest]: Man who was close to his father
[Guest]: And he just didn't want to
[Guest]: Want to tell, to disappoint
[Guest]: His father or let him down
[Guest]: So he just kept it inside, he didn't say to
[Guest]: Anyone
[Guest]: And he's like
[Guest]: And that thing kept building in me
[Guest]: And I got
[Guest]: I was so ashamed of
[Guest]: What I went through
[Guest]: And what I allowed to happen to me
[Guest]: That I realized that before
[Guest]: Anybody can hurt me now, I will hurt them
[Guest]: So I became a bully
[Guest]: That if you can't touch me
[Guest]: Because much before that
[Guest]: I will screw you up
[Guest]: And I constructed an identity around that
[Guest]: And now that you've told me your story
[Guest]: This is the first time
[Guest]: I have ever told this to anybody
[Guest]: And this is something I've heard a lot in the roadshow
[Guest]: This is the first time I'm saying this
[Guest]: To you or anybody
[Guest]: So, I mean, I don't know what I want to do
[Guest]: As like
[Guest]: I think first of all professional help
[Guest]: I talked about therapies, about professional help
[Guest]: Counseling, etc, etc, but I said you should also
[Guest]: At some point tell your parents whenever you're ready
[Guest]: Because it clearly seems like you have
[Guest]: This inside of you, you know
[Guest]: And he's like
[Guest]: Well, I'm ready now. I think I've said this
[Guest]: Now so I feel better. I said, okay, great
[Guest]: Whenever you want to go and tell your parents, do tell it
[Guest]: He's like, yeah, that makes sense. He's like
[Guest]: So can I go now? I said
[Guest]: You want to go and tell now? He said, yeah, can I go now?
[Guest]: I said, yeah, man, go for it, you know
[Guest]: And then I was like
[Guest]: Can I give you a hug? He says, yeah, of course
[Guest]: You know, and I gave him a hug and I said
[Guest]: Best of luck and just tell me, you know
[Guest]: What happens at the end of this
[Guest]: And this is my
[Guest]: Instagram DM, etc
[Guest]: And the night I got this message from him
[Guest]: Day one of the road trip and that's when we know that
[Guest]: What we were doing was worth it
[Guest]: He sent me this beautiful message
[Guest]: Where he said that
[Guest]: Thanks Nikhil, I finally told
[Guest]: My parents what I have inside for the last
[Guest]: Eight years and they told me
[Guest]: The words that I've been waiting to hear from them
[Guest]: All my life, I think and the words
[Guest]: Were it's not your fault
[Guest]: And just hearing his parents
[Guest]: Tell him that it's not his fault
[Guest]: It was just something
[Guest]: That
[Guest]: Stayed with him
[Guest]: Now this kid now said that
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: Sent me a message another one day later
[Guest]: And said, I also want to tell you
[Guest]: That when you gave me a hug the other day
[Guest]: That's the first time anyone's ever hugged me
[Guest]: No one's ever hugged me before
[Guest]: So I just want to say
[Guest]: Thank you for that, you know
[Guest]: And I'd also said in a post after that
[Guest]: Like, you know, love him, love you
[Guest]: It's like no one's even said that to me, it's like
[Guest]: Thank you for this, so thank you, etc, etc
[Guest]: And I was just like man, this is insane
[Guest]: So I kept in touch with this kid, you know
[Guest]: I was curious about his life, etc
[Guest]: Now this boy at this time was doing engineering
[Guest]: In a college
[Guest]: And after this incident
[Guest]: He was so like
[Guest]: Curious about why he behaved the way he behaved
[Guest]: And I spoke about gender, he's like
[Guest]: He would keep in touch with me, he's like
[Guest]: I don't think I want to, you know, now
[Guest]: Do engineering anymore, I want to
[Guest]: Like, I want to find out why I was the way I was
[Guest]: And he's like I want to get
[Guest]: Into sociology, I was like
[Guest]: Okay, you know, so he's like what do you think I should do
[Guest]: I was like you should do what your heart says
[Guest]: And this boy after that, after finishing engineering
[Guest]: In this college, you know, in the pandemic
[Guest]: Studied for, you know, and got
[Guest]: Into JNU, you know
[Guest]: And his whole life has
[Guest]: Gone the other way, and he's studying
[Guest]: Gender studies over there, because he wants
[Guest]: To now, you know, figure
[Guest]: Why did he go through everything
[Guest]: He went through, and there was a whole story
[Guest]: About his mother and his relationship
[Guest]: And how it changed after that, you know
[Guest]: And it's, and I kept in touch with him
[Guest]: I'm still in touch with him, he's very very dear to me now
[Guest]: And this is a boy
[Guest]: Who, so on the same night
[Guest]: You know, this was in a college, we did
[Guest]: These open mics, so at, you are
[Guest]: With the roadshow, so we would go to colleges and do this
[Guest]: And then we'd also say, if somebody is afraid of
[Guest]: In front of a student crowd
[Guest]: Talk about your feelings, we are also doing these open mics
[Guest]: These open mics are storytelling open mics
[Guest]: They're not talent open mics
[Guest]: So if you have a story, and there's nobody who has
[Guest]: Heard it, come and share it, it was as simple as that
[Guest]: So he came to a
[Guest]: Open mic that day, I'm going to tell the second
[Guest]: Story in a bit, but there was a second story
[Guest]: Of a young boy who spoke about
[Guest]: Being homosexual
[Guest]: And bisexual, and
[Amit Varma]: You know, what he went through because of that
[Amit Varma]: This is Mohit
[Guest]: Yeah, so at the end of it
[Guest]: This boy goes up
[Guest]: To Mohit, and tells him
[Guest]: And I heard this, and I was not even
[Guest]: Like, it just happened in my vicinity
[Guest]: And I was just like, what is happening, so sweet
[Guest]: He's like, Mohit, I just want to say that
[Guest]: I've been homophobic before this
[Guest]: But after hearing your story today
[Guest]: I just want to have a chat with you
[Guest]: Like over a cup of tea, you know, I just want to
[Guest]: Hear more about your life and everything
[Guest]: Is it okay if we chat?
[Guest]: And he's like, yeah, I'll take your number, thank you for saying that, etc
[Guest]: And he's like
[Guest]: This one
[Guest]: Conversation
[Guest]: One conversation Amit has led into
[Guest]: This boy's entire life
[Guest]: You know, turning into empathy
[Guest]: It's not that it's been easy, he's been very angry
[Guest]: In the middle about what has happened
[Guest]: And I've chatted with him through this, etc, etc
[Guest]: But he's
[Guest]: He put up the first
[Guest]: His first Instagram post on that
[Guest]: Day ever, where he wrote a poem
[Guest]: And he wrote a poem about the fact
[Guest]: That, you know, like
[Guest]: Today I had
[Guest]: This is a beautiful day, and today
[Guest]: Because I was able to
[Guest]: You know, go beyond my label and find out
[Guest]: My story, you know, and
[Guest]: And that's the potential
[Guest]: Of storytelling, I'll tell you
[Guest]: Mohit's story because for the people
[Guest]: Which is a story which has also again
[Guest]: Happened over 2-3 years, you know, and because
[Guest]: I've kept in touch with these kids, Mohit came
[Guest]: On the, you know, and I can take his
[Guest]: Name because his story is also out there, so we would record
[Guest]: These stories, ask in the open mics, you know
[Guest]: We would say that if you're comfortable, we'll put it up
[Guest]: And we take their consent again, just for everyone to know
[Guest]: Not only on that day, but on the day
[Guest]: Of uploading it, before we upload it, we would
[Guest]: Take their consent and say, can you put the story up?
[Guest]: Are you comfortable with that? Until they gave a go-ahead
[Guest]: We would not put it up, and
[Guest]: Only 2 people overall in our entire
[Guest]: Roadshow have said no, everybody has said yes
[Guest]: Because that's also power, I think, to be able
[Guest]: To express, and it's a catharsis, and it's a
[Guest]: Owning your story is a very important
[Guest]: Thing, so
[Guest]: Mohit's story was, he came and said
[Guest]: Really sweet boy, 18 year old
[Guest]: Came to the open mic, and he was
[Guest]: Trembling, you know, and he first started reading
[Guest]: A poem, and
[Guest]: The poem was about bisexuality, so in the
[Guest]: Middle of the poem, he just stops and says, I don't know
[Guest]: If anybody caught that, but I'm bisexual
[Guest]: And that's the poem, so we cheered for him
[Guest]: He immediately said, woohoo
[Guest]: And Mohit was
[Guest]: Suddenly very surprised, he's like, wait, what?
[Guest]: You know, and
[Guest]: He's like, nobody has ever cheered for me before
[Guest]: It's only been one friend, and now
[Guest]: Second time this, can I please tell you all
[Guest]: My story, and he's like, yeah, that's what we're here for
[Guest]: In this story, poor guy, was the fact
[Guest]: That, you know, at
[Guest]: 15 or 16, his friends had found out
[Guest]: That he's bisexual, they had
[Guest]: Told everybody else, he got flashed
[Guest]: In school, people made fun of him
[Guest]: They made, and the
[Guest]: Word of mouth reached his parents
[Guest]: His father thought that there's something, you know
[Guest]: He needs to go to a
[Guest]: Doctor and get it checked, the mother also was
[Guest]: Not completely understanding of what has happened
[Guest]: And at the end of it
[Guest]: He's like
[Guest]: I just had one friend who was there for me
[Guest]: And that's enough sometimes
[Guest]: So, I'm just glad that today
[Guest]: I found a safe space where somebody else is
[Guest]: Rooted for me, thank you for doing that
[Guest]: He was staying away from his parents at this time, he's like
[Guest]: I can't stay with them anymore because
[Guest]: You know, they think I'm abnormal
[Guest]: Now, what has happened
[Guest]: After this, is that few
[Guest]: Days later, we put his story on the internet, right
[Guest]: Now, when we put his
[Guest]: Story online, and we checked with him, he said, yeah, please
[Guest]: Go for it, there was a lot
[Guest]: Of love and affection that he started
[Guest]: Receiving in his DMs, it was one of our first
[Guest]: Viral stories at Yuva, he started
[Guest]: A lot of people started reaching out, saying
[Guest]: To him that, listen
[Guest]: You know, you don't have to feel alone
[Guest]: You don't have to have a friend, you know, we have a
[Guest]: LGBTQ Gujarat community, why don't you
[Guest]: Join that, and he's like, wow
[Guest]: And then there were people who reached out saying like, listen, I don't
[Guest]: Understand what LGBTQ is, but you're a very
[Guest]: Sweet boy, he showed me those messages, he's like
[Guest]: You're such a sweet kid, I want to, I'm here if you
[Guest]: Ever want to talk, there are
[Guest]: Boys who had bullied him, they reached out
[Guest]: To him saying, I'm sorry, you know, that
[Guest]: This has happened, now what he did next
[Guest]: Is just incredible, okay
[Guest]: This boy, after
[Guest]: That, Amit, because his
[Guest]: Parents had kicked him out of his house, saying
[Guest]: And he, you know, spoke about this, my parents
[Guest]: Would say that, what will people say
[Guest]: Right, you know, what will society
[Guest]: Say, so they kicked him out for that reason
[Guest]: That you stay alone somewhere
[Guest]: He's like
[Guest]: He took a printout of all the
[Guest]: Screenshots, all the DMs that he got
[Guest]: Put them in a scrapbook, and he
[Guest]: Went back home to his parents
[Guest]: Showed it to his mother
[Guest]: And said, people are saying this
[Guest]: Now what will you say
[Guest]: Look at what the
[Guest]: What the entire world is saying
[Guest]: They are supporting me, why don't you
[Guest]: And he's like
[Guest]: At that moment, he's like
[Guest]: My mother held my hand
[Guest]: For very long, went
[Guest]: Through every
[Guest]: Stage of the scrapbook
[Guest]: And then said, I'm gonna try
[Guest]: And then I met him later, and he said, you know what
[Guest]: She's now moved in with me
[Guest]: She's supporting me, and
[Guest]: I'm still like, my father is still not there yet
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: You know, the wonders that
[Guest]: This one story has done to his life
[Guest]: You know, and he's come
[Guest]: By the way, he came with a cake to Bombay to
[Guest]: Give it to us, and he wrote this beautiful letter for us
[Guest]: Saying that, because of that story, my mother
[Guest]: Today is like my friend again
[Guest]: So, that's the power of it
[Guest]: That's the power, there is
[Guest]: One last, there is this one, again, Sahil
[Guest]: Who's become like a really
[Guest]: Dear friend now, sweetest kid
[Guest]: You know, from
[Guest]: IIIT Chennai, you know
[Guest]: I had done a storytelling, so IIIT Chennai
[Guest]: Became somehow like one of those
[Guest]: You know, you have those dream sessions with
[Guest]: 150 kids, we sat from 7pm
[Guest]: In the night to 3am in the morning
[Guest]: Every person spoke, I'm not joking
[Amit Varma]: Every one of those 150 kids spoke that day
[Amit Varma]: It was like a scene on the unseen recording
[Guest]: It was insane, and at the end of it
[Guest]: Right, so
[Guest]: One year later, I went back
[Guest]: Now, this kid came to me, Sahil
[Guest]: And said that after that class, you know
[Guest]: After every of these classes, there's a lot of
[Guest]: Empathy, all these people, you know, start
[Guest]: Again, hugs, catharsis
[Guest]: Beautiful, he's like between the time that
[Guest]: Had happened and this time, you know
[Guest]: Unfortunately
[Guest]: One of the kids
[Guest]: You know, he's from Maharashtra
[Guest]: And one of the other kids from Maharashtra
[Guest]: Had passed away, because he drowned
[Guest]: In, I think that's what it was, he drowned
[Guest]: In a river nearby
[Guest]: And he's like, none of us
[Guest]: Just knew how to process this
[Guest]: We were all kids from Maharashtra
[Guest]: We used to have our own group
[Guest]: And then just we stopped talking
[Guest]: Because we were just sad
[Guest]: And we didn't know how to process
[Guest]: He's like, and then I remembered what happened
[Guest]: In the day that we did that storytelling
[Guest]: Thing in IIIT
[Guest]: And he's like, I realized that maybe we need to
[Guest]: Create a safe space, so he said
[Guest]: That I created this
[Guest]: Club name called
[Guest]: Marathi Mitra Mandir
[Guest]: And he's like, I would just tell everybody
[Guest]: That we are part of the Marathi Mitra Mandir
[Guest]: And we'll meet every night
[Guest]: Just to share with us
[Guest]: Just like we've done on the Rewa Rosh
[Guest]: And he's like, when I did it in that way
[Guest]: Suddenly every night
[Guest]: All these kids who are telling them, let's talk
[Guest]: And let's talk about how we're going through an express
[Guest]: Would never do it
[Guest]: All of these boys came and
[Guest]: Started expressing and started
[Guest]: Crying and started speaking
[Guest]: Like about what happened
[Guest]: And he's like, we were all able to process because of that
[Guest]: One little thing that happened
[Guest]: And there are
[Guest]: So many more stories like this
[Guest]: So so so many stories like this that
[Guest]: I've heard across this and it's not just the stories
[Guest]: Of what has happened on the road show
[Guest]: But the stories of what has happened beyond
[Guest]: And the stories of like when I would go
[Guest]: Back or when I would hear from these kids again
[Guest]: About all the wonderful
[Guest]: Wonderful things in the way in which they have
[Guest]: Used these safe spaces
[Guest]: In the way that they become more empathetic
[Guest]: In the way that they have created
[Guest]: Safe spaces for others who have
[Guest]: Passed it on, you know, if
[Guest]: Anger begets anger, kindness begets
[Guest]: Kindness, if
[Guest]: Toxicity can grow, so can kindness
[Guest]: You just need to
[Guest]: You know, start that
[Guest]: Start by listening, you start by
[Guest]: Sharing, you start by
[Guest]: Creating a safe space for someone else
[Guest]: And someone will do the same for you
[Guest]: I can promise that because that's really
[Guest]: What I've seen, not just from the road show but from
[Guest]: Everywhere else, the amount of
[Guest]: You know, when the, when I spoke about
[Guest]: My story of anxiety, you know, online
[Guest]: I could not have, it was
[Guest]: I was so nervous, I remember like I never
[Guest]: And I got strength from my students because my students
[Guest]: Said, would always talk about their stories
[Guest]: I was like, man, maybe I should also share mine
[Guest]: Because I've been going through
[Guest]: Anxiety for the last
[Guest]: 10-11 months at that time
[Guest]: And all my social media posts show me
[Guest]: As like this, like I'm happy, I'm
[Guest]: Enjoying, my life is great
[Guest]: How can I not
[Guest]: I think I owe it to my students
[Guest]: To talk about my truth as well
[Guest]: So I wrote this long post
[Guest]: Closed my eyes, published it, put it
[Guest]: On Twitter
[Guest]: And then I came back, I think after 2-3 hours
[Guest]: And the responses
[Guest]: Were just
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: Compassion
[Guest]: The love, the kindness
[Guest]: That I received from all kinds of people
[Guest]: Who I knew, who I didn't know
[Guest]: On the internet, the DMs
[Guest]: Just non-stop like
[Guest]: Thank you for sharing, you know
[Guest]: I wish I could, one of my closest friends
[Guest]: You know the funniest thing that happened
[Guest]: One of my closest friends who
[Guest]: I used to meet everyday during
[Guest]: Every week, we were working together on something at Yashar
[Guest]: Who has now become one of my
[Guest]: Dearest, dearest friends, every week we would
[Guest]: Meet, 2 boys
[Guest]: 2 men, same age, same kind
[Guest]: Of like both, you know
[Guest]: Almost like very similar to each other in many different
[Guest]: Ways, and after I put this
[Guest]: Thing, he just came to me, he called me
[Guest]: And he's like, I didn't know you had anxiety
[Guest]: I said, why?
[Guest]: He's like, I also have anxiety, I'm like what?
[Guest]: He's like, yeah you've been going to a therapist
[Guest]: I've also been going to a therapist, he's like
[Guest]: I didn't know that I could share with you
[Guest]: I was like, can you imagine, we've been
[Guest]: Like meeting every week for
[Guest]: 8 months, as 2 men
[Guest]: Who've become friends with each other
[Guest]: And we've not been able to say to each other
[Guest]: That we have anxiety, because that's
[Guest]: The kind of stigma, but when you share
[Guest]: The kind of love and empathy that happens
[Guest]: After that, and now I've become
[Guest]: That person and we've become these people like
[Guest]: He just like, every, randomly
[Guest]: Once in a while, I get a I love you
[Guest]: From him, that's it, nothing else
[Guest]: No context, I love you
[Guest]: I love you, that's it
[Guest]: And why can't men do that?
[Guest]: I just find it like, you know, one of the things
[Guest]: On the internet, that just kind of pet peeves
[Guest]: Of mine is like, always see, look at
[Guest]: The way girls champion each other on
[Guest]: Instagram comments, you put
[Guest]: Anything, you can put a picture of a sandwich
[Guest]: And you know the other girls would be like
[Amit Varma]: Yas queen, eat this sandwich, go for it
[Guest]: What a beautiful, beautiful thing
[Guest]: Blah blah blah, guys can do
[Guest]: Anything, I mean they can have
[Guest]: Beautiful pictures, they can have
[Guest]: Like, they can literally change the world and there
[Guest]: Is still some other guy, one of his best friends in the comments
[Guest]: Saying, idiot, you know
[Guest]: What do you think of yourself, what kind of
[Guest]: Asshole you are, you know, that's the
[Guest]: So to speak love language
[Guest]: You are not
[Guest]: So few people, even right now
[Guest]: As somebody who really talks a lot about
[Guest]: Again, mental health, empathy, etc
[Guest]: 70% of my
[Guest]: Followers at this point are
[Guest]: Women, 80-90%
[Guest]: Of my comments are women
[Guest]: And I might be talking about
[Guest]: Masculinity, let me tell you that, I might
[Guest]: Write a post about masculinity and there is like
[Guest]: 90% women talking about it, you know
[Guest]: Thank you for saying this, etc, where are the men?
[Guest]: Why are you so afraid of talking, it's not like they are not
[Guest]: Seen, I know that they are
[Guest]: Seen, I know that, you know
[Guest]: Because they comment on some other random
[Guest]: Things I might do, but a few of them
[Guest]: Who are comfortable with their masculinity
[Guest]: Would probably even now send
[Guest]: Hearts or whatever, but they would fit into
[Guest]: Because he is a poet, that's why he is doing it
[Guest]: There is a writer who might be doing this
[Guest]: You know, but otherwise traditionally
[Guest]: You just don't do it, but why?
[Guest]: It's okay
[Guest]: Go online and share love
[Guest]: Put hearts, you know, let people
[Guest]: Know that you love them
[Guest]: Let boys know you love them
[Guest]: Give them hugs, it's okay
[Guest]: The world will become far more
[Guest]: Non-toxic if we are able to put our
[Guest]: Stories out there and we are able to
[Guest]: Share it with people
[Guest]: Because that's what stories do, they just bring
[Guest]: This kind of incredible wave of empathy
[Guest]: And love that all of us
[Guest]: Need in our lives, but we need to
[Guest]: Need to have that courage and one last point
[Guest]: Right now, which is that
[Guest]: This is also the power of the internet, right
[Guest]: Where you have, where it can be used
[Guest]: In all these terrible and negative ways
[Guest]: You can also
[Guest]: The incredible power of it is
[Guest]: That you can also use it in incredibly
[Guest]: Positive ways, you can
[Guest]: Use this, if you don't have a community
[Guest]: Start one, if you don't have
[Guest]: If you've never heard a story like
[Guest]: Yours, tell yours, if you've
[Guest]: Not found
[Guest]: The boys or the men
[Guest]: You know, who
[Guest]: Care for you, you know
[Guest]: Put that on the internet and I'm sure
[Guest]: That there'll be people out there who are also
[Guest]: Feeling the same thing and that
[Guest]: Has happened so often with me and I've seen
[Guest]: It happen so often with others, I just
[Guest]: Use it to the incredible
[Guest]: Potential it has, you know, put
[Guest]: Your story out there and you'll see that
[Guest]: You know, more often than not, there are people who are
[Guest]: Who will cheer for you
[Guest]: Then like, you know, shut you down
[Amit Varma]: So, if there are any male listeners listening
[Amit Varma]: To this who are stimulated or moved by
[Amit Varma]: This, please express it
[Amit Varma]: You know, you can tweet
[Amit Varma]: At us and so on
[Amit Varma]: You know, so I
[Amit Varma]: This has been a pet peeve of mine and something that I've
[Amit Varma]: Realized that I've been guilty of as well
[Amit Varma]: That men just don't express
[Amit Varma]: The way they feel, especially to other men
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode a while back with
[Amit Varma]: A few months back with an old friend of mine
[Amit Varma]: Chandra Raj Choudhary
[Amit Varma]: And like
[Amit Varma]: Conversations, it was very open and all of that
[Amit Varma]: And later when my wife heard it, she was
[Amit Varma]: Like, I didn't know you guys were so close
[Amit Varma]: And I
[Amit Varma]: And my reply was, we didn't know
[Unknown]: That either, right
[Amit Varma]: And so it's kind of
[Amit Varma]: You know, you sort of
[Amit Varma]: Realize that in so many ways
[Amit Varma]: You hold back and the holding back
[Amit Varma]: Just kind of hurts you
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about
[Amit Varma]: Anxiety, you know, one of the
[Amit Varma]: Themes that you've spoken a lot about
[Amit Varma]: Is mental health
[Amit Varma]: And your journey towards understanding
[Amit Varma]: That, like you said, started with
[Amit Varma]: Your own issues, at a point
[Amit Varma]: In time where you are
[Amit Varma]: Incredibly successful, right
[Amit Varma]: You are at Yash Raj, you've made
[Amit Varma]: Four of the first ten web series in India
[Amit Varma]: As it were, and everything's
[Amit Varma]: Just going so great
[Amit Varma]: And then this happens, and then
[Amit Varma]: You kind of figure it out, and the thing is, for an earlier
[Amit Varma]: Generation, there wouldn't even have been
[Unknown]: A way to make sense of it
[Amit Varma]: Because people would say
[Amit Varma]: Why are you depressed
[Amit Varma]: Or cheer up, or why are you feeling
[Amit Varma]: This way, everything is fine, do yoga
[Unknown]: You know, that kind of
[Amit Varma]: Rubbish, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: Your journey, specifically you mentioned that when you
[Amit Varma]: Spoke to that friend of yours
[Amit Varma]: You met her, and she told you
[Unknown]: One, two, three, four, these are the things that
[Unknown]: Happened, what were those things
[Guest]: And what was it like?
[Guest]: So, the way that I've now
[Guest]: Found
[Guest]: You know, to explain anxiety
[Guest]: To someone, and now I've also realized it's a little
[Guest]: Privileged, so to speak, but
[Guest]: The easiest reference point for me was that
[Guest]: If you've ever been on a plane
[Guest]: You know, and you've had turbulence
[Guest]: And then your heart sinks for a second
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Anxiety is like that sinking feeling
[Guest]: But all the time
[Guest]: It's your heart not stopping
[Guest]: From sinking
[Guest]: You know, it is
[Guest]: What in
[Guest]: Hindi sometimes, you know, we kind of
[Guest]: Say it as ghavrat
[Guest]: But, you know, because we don't have
[Guest]: Vocabulary for what is anxiety
[Guest]: So ghavrat bolte, which can also be nervousness
[Guest]: But a lot of the times when people
[Guest]: Say it, I think it is coming from a sense of
[Guest]: Your heart sinking
[Guest]: It is feeling
[Guest]: Too overwhelmed
[Guest]: Because you're not
[Guest]: Able to feel
[Guest]: The emotions you want to
[Guest]: It is, you feel too much because
[Guest]: You feel too little
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: And it has a
[Guest]: Reaction to your body also
[Guest]: So for me
[Guest]: To give you, you know, examples
[Guest]: Anxiety
[Guest]: Had turned into a way where
[Guest]: It had turned so bad for me that
[Guest]: If I would get up
[Guest]: Let's assume at 7.30
[Guest]: And I have to
[Guest]: Get out of my house by 8.30
[Guest]: To get to my office and I was living in Kandivali
[Guest]: At that time my office was like an hour away
[Guest]: Or something in Andheri
[Guest]: So at 9.30 I have to get there
[Guest]: But for that my Uber needs to arrive
[Guest]: At a certain point and then I will get to office at 9.30
[Guest]: And from 9.30 to 10 I had time
[Guest]: For myself before the office
[Guest]: Hour started and that was a very important time
[Guest]: For me that I will organize myself and then
[Guest]: This work will start. So this was the routine that I had
[Guest]: When anxiety took over me
[Guest]: If my Uber instead of
[Guest]: Coming at 8.30
[Guest]: Sometimes would just cancel
[Guest]: 8.40
[Guest]: 8.45 it came late
[Guest]: I would not be able to
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Go to work that day because
[Guest]: I would
[Guest]: You know so
[Guest]: There is a book
[Guest]: Where I think one of the Green Brothers
[Guest]: Called it Thought Spirals
[Guest]: You know that your thoughts start
[Guest]: Spiraling in such a huge way
[Guest]: Where I am now in my head
[Guest]: I am like ok now before the Uber has come
[Guest]: I just see that ok it's going to be late by 5 minutes
[Guest]: In my head I am like
[Guest]: Ok so 5 minutes it's going to be late
[Guest]: I am going to not be able to reach my office because the traffic
[Guest]: Will increase. I will reach only by 9.45
[Guest]: And you know before I can even
[Guest]: You know get organized or whatever it is
[Guest]: The meetings will start. So I would actually not get time
[Guest]: To prep for those meetings and once the meetings
[Guest]: Start then you know I am
[Guest]: Anyway going to be unprepared and people
[Guest]: Will find out that I am not good at what I do
[Guest]: At the end of it you know they will come and tell me
[Guest]: Because I have also been happening for so long
[Guest]: And I am you know
[Guest]: And maybe it will turn into
[Guest]: A conversation about whether I deserve this job or not
[Guest]: And I will probably get fired
[Guest]: And this is
[Guest]: How big you think when it comes to literally Uber
[Guest]: Getting late and if it's going to get
[Guest]: Fired what is the point of going
[Guest]: What is the point of going on this job right now
[Guest]: There is no point. I would much rather stay home
[Guest]: And just like instead of facing the world
[Guest]: I would much rather just sleep in my
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Bed today and just avoid
[Guest]: Putting myself in the situation where I will
[Guest]: Get fired
[Guest]: And that's how badly it
[Guest]: That's where it goes
[Guest]: And it could start with just as simple as
[Guest]: Uber getting late. Anxiety is when
[Guest]: You have when somebody sends
[Guest]: A message saying hi
[Guest]: But doesn't say anything more than that
[Guest]: And you start panicking
[Guest]: What does this hi mean
[Guest]: This person has said hey before
[Guest]: But not hi before. Does this mean
[Guest]: That there is some bad news
[Guest]: Does this mean that I have offended this person
[Guest]: Does this mean that
[Guest]: There is something they want to say to me
[Guest]: That they can't say and until I say it back
[Guest]: You start. There is just so many
[Guest]: Scenarios. Your head is
[Guest]: Filled with scenarios of all
[Guest]: The terrible things that
[Guest]: Can happen to you because of
[Guest]: Because of this one little thing
[Guest]: That might go wrong and you are
[Guest]: It's
[Guest]: Unbearable. I mean it's not
[Guest]: Something that I mean I went the one
[Guest]: Year the first year. I still have anxiety
[Guest]: But I don't. I mean it's not clinical now
[Guest]: So there is of course it's a spectrum also
[Guest]: Right. So you
[Guest]: Sometimes when you have an exam the night before
[Guest]: You get very. That's also anxiety
[Guest]: But that's you know that will happen on
[Guest]: You know you have a tough day at work. You have an appraisal
[Guest]: Coming up. You are tense about it
[Guest]: Those are all also anxieties
[Guest]: But then when it becomes persistent
[Guest]: When it becomes you know
[Guest]: Relentless in many ways
[Guest]: And it goes on for months and days
[Guest]: And end. That can sometimes
[Guest]: Be clinical. So
[Guest]: And it's called generalized anxiety
[Guest]: Disorder and so I was
[Guest]: Diagnosed with that at some point
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: Before that it was just for me like my
[Guest]: Just overthinking that's what I would think
[Guest]: Of it. Why am I overthinking you know
[Guest]: It wasn't overthinking. It was just my brain like
[Guest]: Just absolutely
[Guest]: Not pausing for breath
[Guest]: You know it would just
[Guest]: I would have to. I was telling you
[Guest]: I was going to US for that event
[Guest]: Goalkeepers and I was
[Guest]: In. I was so
[Guest]: Tense because I was just like
[Guest]: Man I am going to. My
[Guest]: Bag will not reach. It just
[Guest]: Became a thing in me that you know and I have gone
[Guest]: To. You know I have travelled internationally a lot
[Guest]: I have grown up in of course in Bahrain so
[Guest]: But I just said that I am going
[Guest]: You know I will take a lot of my
[Guest]: Clothes. I have you know bought
[Guest]: New clothes for this but my bag
[Guest]: Will get misplaced and if it get misplaced
[Guest]: Then I will not have anything to wear
[Guest]: And because I am overweight I will not find the right fit
[Guest]: So when I go to the event I will not have clothes
[Guest]: To wear so people maybe they won't
[Guest]: Let me enter because it's a black tie event or whatever
[Guest]: It is etc etc. So that is my
[Guest]: I would have these conversations with my therapist
[Guest]: And she just be like you know
[Guest]: Of course she will get me to do breathing
[Guest]: Exercises and then say you know
[Guest]: What is so one of the things
[Guest]: Then the exercises she would give me was like
[Guest]: Think of the worst that could
[Guest]: Happen and I would say okay this is the
[Guest]: Worst that could happen. I will be
[Guest]: It won't come and I will have to fly back
[Guest]: Okay so if that is
[Guest]: The worst that could happen is it really that bad
[Guest]: And then when you start thinking okay
[Guest]: Maybe it's not that bad
[Guest]: Then you start getting a little calmer you know
[Guest]: So I mean there are so many different things that
[Guest]: Would work for different people but it was
[Guest]: Unbearable for me
[Guest]: I would have trouble breathing I would have trouble
[Guest]: Getting off my bed you know on certain days
[Guest]: I would have what I realized
[Guest]: Later were panic attacks where
[Guest]: Just you are frozen
[Guest]: For like 20 minutes you feel like you are having a heart
[Guest]: Attack and it's just your body
[Guest]: Refusing to like give you the
[Guest]: Your brain refusing
[Guest]: To give signals to your body that it's okay to get up
[Guest]: And you know because you are just like what is the
[Guest]: Point everything sucks and everything is
[Guest]: Terrible terrible terrible
[Guest]: So it was it was I would sweat a lot
[Guest]: I would constantly be sweating
[Guest]: I was constantly be like you know
[Guest]: I am not able to
[Guest]: Things are going to go wrong so yeah
[Guest]: Even now I know when I know
[Guest]: I am getting anxious I know because when sweat happens
[Guest]: You know my body my heart would start pacing
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: So these were the symbols
[Guest]: And you know which I again a lot of my
[Guest]: My wife you know
[Guest]: Daisy
[Guest]: Used to think
[Guest]: That again it might have something to do with my heart
[Guest]: Because again you know she is like
[Guest]: You get it checked or whatever it is maybe it's a
[Guest]: Cholesterol issue whatever it is
[Guest]: She noticed it I wasn't even able to
[Guest]: Notice it you know when you are in it you are not able
[Guest]: To have that perspective
[Guest]: She was the first person to notice and say I think something
[Guest]: Going on with you why are you so like
[Guest]: Tense all the time why are you sweating so much
[Guest]: And sweating was the thing you should go to a doctor
[Guest]: When I went to a doctor about this
[Guest]: And she is like you don't have your heart is fine
[Guest]: You have anxiety
[Guest]: What does that mean
[Guest]: You know so first they gave pills but I was like
[Guest]: Okay let me just you know I also wanted
[Guest]: To figure before I take pills
[Guest]: Is there another alternate
[Guest]: Or whatever it is you know
[Guest]: And I mean
[Guest]: Pills work for a lot of people I just
[Guest]: Someone who wants to first see that if there is
[Guest]: An either way and then kind of okay with pills
[Guest]: Also so that's when therapy
[Guest]: Was suggested to me and then it took me
[Guest]: I think two more months after that point to actually
[Guest]: Go to therapy because I was like
[Guest]: I can't go to therapy
[Guest]: If I am a man does that
[Guest]: If I go to therapy that means I have to
[Guest]: Admit that something is broken in me
[Guest]: And can I
[Guest]: You know and can I
[Guest]: I am not comfortable with the idea
[Guest]: That I am broken and need to be
[Guest]: Fixed you know
[Guest]: I am fine so what
[Guest]: So many you know people go through
[Guest]: All kinds of shit what is this
[Guest]: I can't overcome like this little thing but it wasn't
[Guest]: Little it was unbearable it was
[Guest]: Unbearable I literally had to quit my job
[Guest]: Take six months off
[Guest]: Leave everything
[Guest]: Take a sabbatical in my life
[Guest]: Before I was able to feel you know
[Guest]: Better and it's only when I started
[Guest]: Working on something I cared about
[Guest]: Working on like mental health
[Guest]: And you know that I got a little bit of strength
[Guest]: Back but it was
[Guest]: It's hard it's very
[Guest]: Very hard and there's not enough resources that
[Guest]: You know so
[Guest]: Unfortunately we don't even have
[Guest]: Again as I said we don't have a vocabulary of mental
[Guest]: Health in our country right
[Guest]: In regional languages or even in Hindi
[Guest]: What when you have
[Guest]: Depression or anxiety what do you say
[Guest]: There is no colloquial terms for it
[Guest]: There is
[Guest]: Which is mental health
[Guest]: You know but no one
[Guest]: Says
[Guest]: That's not something you talk about right
[Guest]: Depression is
[Guest]: Dukh
[Guest]: There is no word for it in that sense right
[Guest]: There are clinical terms maybe
[Guest]: But no colloquial terms so when you
[Guest]: When you are sad
[Guest]: You are sad but then
[Guest]: Sadness, upset, depression
[Guest]: Spectrum there is no
[Guest]: Way of communicating how
[Guest]: I am very sad but it's still
[Guest]: Sad right you can be sad when
[Guest]: You know you are you have a
[Guest]: Heartbreak and you can also be sad
[Guest]: When you know you are depressed for six months but
[Guest]: How do you compare so
[Guest]: And because of that it's been so
[Guest]: Difficult to have conversations about mental health
[Guest]: In our homes and our families
[Guest]: Because your parents don't have terms for it
[Guest]: And they think of it as a foreign thing
[Guest]: We don't have it here
[Guest]: It's a mental
[Guest]: The moment you hear mental first thing people think is
[Guest]: Like psycho the second thing
[Guest]: Is like mental hospital
[Guest]: Those are the
[Guest]: I mean can you imagine
[Guest]: It's so tragic that you know
[Guest]: Last year
[Guest]: You know last year
[Guest]: When Sushant Singh Rajput
[Guest]: Passed away you know
[Guest]: Our country
[Guest]: Concocted a narrative
[Guest]: Of a conspiracy
[Guest]: In his death
[Guest]: Because we were unwilling to accept
[Guest]: That he could have
[Guest]: Died by suicide
[Guest]: Because how can someone successful
[Guest]: Want to do that there has to be
[Guest]: Something nasty behind it
[Guest]: But Robin Williams
[Guest]: Has also done that unfortunately
[Guest]: And there are a lot of other folks
[Guest]: Who have spoken about it
[Guest]: And attempted it and done it
[Guest]: Because it's mental health can happen
[Guest]: To anybody
[Guest]: Issues can happen to anybody
[Guest]: It does not discriminate
[Guest]: It doesn't matter
[Guest]: If you are at a low in your life
[Guest]: It doesn't matter if you are high in your life
[Guest]: You can have depression you can have anxiety
[Guest]: And it's okay
[Guest]: And you can go and get it treated
[Guest]: You can go to a doctor
[Guest]: Same thing that you know you go
[Guest]: You go to a doctor when you have a cold
[Guest]: Now you might go to
[Guest]: Find out if it's a cold or it's a covid
[Guest]: It could be a cold spectrum
[Guest]: Right in the same way
[Guest]: When you are having trouble
[Guest]: With your mind sometimes you just
[Guest]: Have to get a checkup to see that is it just
[Guest]: You know a little tension
[Guest]: A little stress
[Guest]: Is it burnout or is it
[Guest]: You know clinical depression
[Guest]: Clinical anxiety and there are
[Guest]: Ways of overcoming it
[Guest]: But you need to be comfortable with having
[Guest]: The conversation first which in our country
[Guest]: In our society in our families
[Guest]: We are so afraid of
[Guest]: Anybody says it and it's
[Guest]: Seen as like again in the roadshow
[Guest]: So many kids have said that you know
[Guest]: I harm myself because
[Guest]: I told my parents I want therapy but
[Guest]: They are saying you are not mental
[Guest]: So then I need my pain to go away so I harm
[Guest]: Myself these are the kind of things you are hearing
[Guest]: In this country
[Guest]: It's tough but as I
[Guest]: Said you know I mean the more we talk
[Guest]: About it the more normal it will be the more
[Guest]: Normal it will be the more
[Guest]: Unafraid we will be there are
[Guest]: Statistics that say that mental health issues
[Guest]: Have increased I don't think that
[Guest]: They have increased I think we are just
[Guest]: Talking about them more I think they are always
[Guest]: There you know
[Guest]: It's just that it's also how there are
[Guest]: Statistics that say that there are more
[Guest]: You know lgbtq people in the world right now
[Guest]: No they have always been there they just started
[Guest]: Coming out more right because
[Guest]: Now it's a little bit normal to do that and
[Guest]: In the same way it's a little bit normal to talk about mental health
[Guest]: We have always been struggling mental health
[Guest]: Our parents have struggled from mental health I have seen my
[Guest]: Parents go through it as I said my father
[Guest]: Used to go through something which
[Guest]: I realized my father had anxiety when I got it
[Guest]: All my life
[Guest]: Growing up I used to get so angry
[Guest]: At the way he would behave
[Guest]: And then I had emotional breakdowns and I had
[Guest]: I told you I can't
[Guest]: Cry I had breakdowns where I was crying
[Guest]: For three four days
[Guest]: I just it was
[Guest]: Crying there were times that I couldn't stop I would
[Guest]: Want to stop but I just
[Guest]: Couldn't it was so bad
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: And you know and
[Guest]: Then I kind of recognized that well my father
[Guest]: Has gone through things
[Guest]: And I did not know and none of us were aware
[Guest]: And we were
[Guest]: Resented him for the way he was behaving
[Guest]: But we didn't have
[Guest]: The instruments or the
[Guest]: Language to talk
[Guest]: About what our parents have gone through
[Guest]: So many old people
[Guest]: Today are going through it
[Guest]: In my family again there are people who
[Guest]: Are because they are lonely in their
[Guest]: Old age they are going
[Guest]: Through it but we don't
[Guest]: Talk about it and there are
[Guest]: Very few support systems
[Guest]: The mental health professionals
[Guest]: That we have per person is just
[Guest]: Such an abysmal number
[Guest]: And again it's so still
[Guest]: The point of entry is so expensive
[Guest]: That
[Guest]: I don't know I mean again so
[Guest]: I still have hope I still again
[Guest]: I feel like this generation is making it
[Guest]: Normal to talk about these issues
[Guest]: They are putting it out there
[Guest]: Making it a conversation
[Guest]: And through that I think like even
[Guest]: Families now you know are
[Guest]: Comfortable with I know
[Guest]: Now some people who are older in the
[Guest]: Parents age group who
[Guest]: Have now expressed to the children saying that
[Guest]: Yeah I'm okay with trying it
[Guest]: More parents are joining it and I think
[Guest]: Like we need to look out for the not only
[Guest]: Our mental health or the mental health of younger folks
[Guest]: But also the mental health of our older
[Guest]: You know of older folks you know
[Guest]: They are probably going through the toughest
[Guest]: Transition since the pandemic imagine
[Guest]: Having to stay
[Guest]: Alone without your children not
[Guest]: Being able to have that
[Guest]: Love or hugs from them
[Guest]: You know being able to touch them because of
[Guest]: The danger that they might give you something
[Guest]: How tough it must have been
[Amit Varma]: And I guess
[Amit Varma]: You know one of the common misconceptions
[Amit Varma]: About the subject is
[Amit Varma]: That the mind is something different from the
[Guest]: Body there's a ghost in the machine
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is no the mind is part of the
[Amit Varma]: You know the brain is part of the body
[Amit Varma]: You know shit happens like one of my
[Amit Varma]: Favorite musicians Chris Cornell
[Amit Varma]: Went because he started taking
[Amit Varma]: Unrelated medication for something
[Amit Varma]: Which caused him to be more suicidal
[Amit Varma]: Thorachemical imbalance shifted
[Amit Varma]: This happened that happened
[Amit Varma]: So you would have asked
[Amit Varma]: Yourself at some point what is causing this
[Amit Varma]: What was the
[Amit Varma]: You know what were the kind of
[Amit Varma]: Answers that you looked at
[Guest]: So there are two aspects to this and you know
[Guest]: Again let me again start by saying
[Guest]: That I am not a trained professional
[Guest]: I only know I only have lived experience
[Guest]: And I can only speak from that
[Guest]: But there is of course this
[Guest]: One
[Guest]: You know medical thinking that says
[Guest]: It is chemical imbalance only
[Guest]: And then you take pills and you get better
[Guest]: And then there is the psychotherapy
[Guest]: You know line of thought
[Guest]: Which sometimes you do with medicines
[Guest]: And say you know it's both
[Guest]: But the second one is more about
[Guest]: Well it is suicidal it is coming from
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Deep seated
[Guest]: Issues that could even have started in childhood
[Guest]: That are now acting up
[Guest]: So sometimes it is one or the other
[Guest]: Sometimes it is both again
[Guest]: And that's what I have been told and that's what
[Guest]: I have found out
[Guest]: I think that a lot of
[Guest]: Mental health issues today
[Guest]: Are not
[Guest]: Just because of chemical imbalance
[Guest]: Which is one extreme
[Guest]: You know which is one in the spectrum
[Guest]: There is that but that is when
[Guest]: You it's really you know and sometimes it
[Guest]: Borders then on mental illness
[Guest]: You know where you do need medication
[Guest]: To
[Guest]: Help and that's completely okay right
[Guest]: On the other hand what
[Guest]: Depression anxiety in a lot of people today
[Guest]: And these words are being thrown around a lot
[Guest]: Without full context to them
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: They come from the lies
[Guest]: This whole conversation that we have had
[Guest]: Has been about that only
[Guest]: I found out as I said in my therapy
[Guest]: That it happened because I am a man
[Guest]: Because I was I had
[Guest]: Burdened myself to live
[Guest]: The story
[Guest]: That was told to me by society
[Guest]: To such a large extent
[Guest]: That I started getting anxiety
[Guest]: About
[Guest]: Where do I even go from here
[Guest]: I have nothing left to do
[Guest]: I have ticked off all the
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Check boxes that I was given as a
[Guest]: Young kid as a man
[Guest]: To fulfill by a certain age and I fulfilled
[Guest]: It but now what
[Guest]: Where do I go from here I am already
[Guest]: At Yashraj I am 30 I have
[Guest]: Become GM at Yashraj
[Guest]: What next
[Guest]: Maybe I become AVP maybe I become
[Guest]: President or whatever
[Guest]: I make more films I make more shows
[Guest]: And that's it I just keep doing that
[Guest]: Over and over again and sometimes that's enough right
[Guest]: For a lot of people and that's enough
[Guest]: But I was just like
[Guest]: I had this idea that again
[Guest]: Are you happy after retirement
[Guest]: If you accomplish milestones there will be some
[Guest]: Like joy at the end of it
[Guest]: But there was no particular
[Guest]: Joy after making those web shows
[Guest]: Or making those things it was a
[Guest]: Great thing
[Guest]: But I had put all the burden
[Guest]: Of my joy
[Guest]: Linked to my success
[Guest]: Because as a man that is what I was
[Guest]: Told you hit these milestones
[Guest]: And that is success and that success
[Guest]: Is equal to happiness
[Guest]: But I found out that to be patently false
[Guest]: You know success and
[Guest]: Happiness have nothing to do with each other
[Guest]: And what is success
[Guest]: This idea of success is flawed
[Guest]: It's the stupidest idea in the world
[Guest]: What is success
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: It's so ridiculous
[Guest]: That we have put we have
[Guest]: Quantified success
[Guest]: As
[Guest]: Things you something
[Guest]: You achieve if you do one two three
[Guest]: Four steps you know
[Guest]: And I can tell you
[Guest]: Any person who becomes successful
[Guest]: Is unhappy because there is always
[Guest]: Another more successful person out there
[Guest]: That he or she then compares themselves to
[Guest]: And that's the
[Guest]: And that's what it is
[Guest]: Once you hit a milestone there are more milestones
[Guest]: Once you hit your goals there are more goals
[Guest]: Once you hit a certain kind of success
[Guest]: There is more success
[Guest]: Shahrukh Khan has had
[Guest]: Many flops and he is Shahrukh Khan
[Guest]: Amitabh Bachchan went through this
[Guest]: Entire phase where he was
[Guest]: He didn't have money and he was Amitabh Bachchan
[Guest]: You know and I am giving you
[Guest]: References from Bollywood but I am saying that
[Guest]: Tell me one person who has always been successful
[Guest]: And that's it he has made it
[Guest]: And Khatam there is no such thing once you make it
[Guest]: It's not over you still have to do
[Guest]: Continue staying relevant I have to do more
[Guest]: To continue being in that position
[Guest]: So it's a never ending cycle
[Guest]: It's a trap this idea
[Guest]: Of success is a trap and the more
[Guest]: You chase that idea the more you chase
[Guest]: This thought that you know once I hit
[Guest]: These X Y Z milestones
[Guest]: Then I can be happy then you are
[Guest]: Never going to be happy I am so sorry to say
[Guest]: That but that's just how it is because
[Guest]: You are always something else
[Guest]: It happened with me when I was in
[Guest]: School when I was told
[Guest]: That you know well I mean everybody is told
[Guest]: Right if you do 10th then
[Guest]: You will be set for 12th
[Guest]: But it also happens when
[Guest]: You know if you are an overachiever
[Guest]: Or whatever it is
[Guest]: First your parents tell you to top in class
[Guest]: Very good
[Guest]: And then you top in class then you top in school
[Guest]: Then you top in school
[Guest]: Now you have to top in the district
[Guest]: Now you have topped there but you have topped in India
[Guest]: You have topped in India but
[Guest]: Where are you when it comes to Harvard and international students
[Guest]: You know who in the world
[Guest]: Are you
[Guest]: There is always going to be someone
[Guest]: You will either compare yourself with
[Guest]: Or others people will compare you with
[Guest]: And it will never be enough
[Guest]: It will never ever ever be enough
[Guest]: And that is 99%
[Guest]: Of the issues because of which we have mental health
[Guest]: Issues in our country because we have this
[Guest]: Conditioned idea
[Guest]: Of what success should look like
[Guest]: This will be the designation, this much money should be there
[Guest]: Whatever it is but none
[Guest]: Of that is success in my opinion
[Guest]: And in my belief system
[Guest]: I feel like success is
[Guest]: Being able to
[Guest]: You know live a day in which
[Guest]: When you wake up in the morning you are happy to do whatever the hell
[Guest]: You are doing that's success
[Guest]: That's as it's as simple
[Guest]: As that are you you call it
[Guest]: Monday morning Monday blues or whatever it is
[Guest]: I am not saying that you can't have them you can have them
[Guest]: But you dislike your life because
[Guest]: You have broken it into
[Guest]: Like you know okay I go to
[Guest]: Work and then I come to home and work
[Guest]: Is bad and home is good and
[Guest]: At the end of work if I am getting money then it's fine
[Guest]: If the appraisal is good then it's fine
[Guest]: But 80% of the you know
[Guest]: Everybody is on autopilot
[Guest]: Just living this hoping that you know
[Guest]: Someday when I get this appraisal when I get this
[Guest]: When I unlock this level of
[Guest]: My career that's when happiness will come
[Guest]: But that's none of that is
[Guest]: How it is going to work out
[Guest]: You need to
[Guest]: Be at peace with the idea
[Guest]: That
[Guest]: Success is a notion
[Guest]: That has been again put by a system
[Guest]: That wants to
[Guest]: Capitalist system that wants
[Guest]: To continue running on the
[Guest]: On your hamster wheel
[Guest]: That is what success is
[Guest]: If you have a family
[Guest]: That you love and loves about you
[Guest]: That loves you back that's success also
[Guest]: If you have
[Guest]: Something that you love doing that you find joy in
[Guest]: That's success also
[Guest]: If you you know and it could be anything
[Guest]: If you have
[Guest]: 1 lakh rupees but you are
[Guest]: Happy in that 1 lakh rupees or you don't
[Guest]: But you are
[Guest]: Content in that
[Guest]: 1 lakh rupees that's success
[Guest]: There is no other thing
[Guest]: And that's also happiness
[Guest]: Happiness I feel again in my
[Guest]: Personal opinion I just feel like you know
[Guest]: We look for happiness in the big things but happiness
[Guest]: Always in the smaller things
[Guest]: It is in the joy of the present
[Guest]: Versus the
[Guest]: Idea of the future
[Guest]: It's so hard for us to find it
[Guest]: And some of this again coming back to how
[Guest]: Internet you know the internet
[Guest]: Today is all about what's next
[Guest]: You are consuming things in a way
[Guest]: Where
[Guest]: You are making that victory
[Guest]: It's like I am now watching
[Guest]: One reel but this is fun
[Guest]: I like it but I have to go to the next one
[Guest]: Because that can be better
[Guest]: Then I have to go to the next one that's better
[Guest]: So you have also been conditioned to think that whatever is coming next is going to be
[Guest]: Much better than the one
[Guest]: How do you survive in the system
[Guest]: Obviously everybody has anxiety
[Guest]: And depression everybody is going through it
[Guest]: Without even recognizing it because this is
[Guest]: A system that is made to
[Guest]: You know screw with your mental health
[Guest]: You are not allowed to live in the present
[Guest]: Imagine you are on twitter right now and you see that
[Guest]: Okay there is you know unfortunately a
[Guest]: A tragedy that has happened in an estate
[Guest]: And you are seeing that
[Guest]: Video of that tragedy and you are just feeling really
[Guest]: Bad about it
[Guest]: And before you can think or process
[Guest]: The next tweet is about
[Guest]: A film you love and a really funny
[Guest]: Visual from that film and you are like oh
[Guest]: Haha and before you can
[Guest]: Think about that or stay on that
[Guest]: There is someone that
[Guest]: You know who has said something which has offended
[Guest]: You and you are just like I am angry now
[Guest]: And then again you are you see a cat
[Guest]: Video and you are like oh so cute
[Guest]: What you are your mind is
[Guest]: Constantly
[Guest]: In so many different
[Guest]: Places because at the
[Guest]: Same time you are constantly
[Guest]: Chasing the next high
[Guest]: That you are now conditioned
[Guest]: Now we are society conditioned in a larger
[Guest]: Way it is about you know
[Guest]: After one year of hard work there is going
[Guest]: To be appraisal where you will get the money
[Guest]: And that's when if you are successful you will be
[Guest]: Happy if you are unsuccessful you will be
[Guest]: Unhappy that was society telling
[Guest]: Us now social media apps are telling
[Guest]: Us well in the same moment
[Guest]: You know until you go to the next
[Guest]: Video you will not be happy because the next video has
[Guest]: Unlocked the happiness for you
[Guest]: So it's a
[Guest]: It's very tough
[Guest]: I am just I get very like
[Guest]: This is one of those areas that I get very worried about
[Guest]: Because I feel like there is a
[Guest]: Epidemic of
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Mental health you know
[Guest]: Problems that a country
[Guest]: And the world at this point is going through
[Guest]: And we are not
[Guest]: Talking about it enough
[Guest]: We are not
[Guest]: We are not even recognizing that
[Guest]: This is mental health
[Guest]: Our attention spans have gone
[Guest]: For a toss
[Guest]: We are constantly chasing
[Guest]: The next high you know
[Guest]: Relationships have been reduced to swipe right
[Guest]: Swipe left you know
[Guest]: Victory and defeat has been you know victory
[Guest]: And like whatever you know and
[Guest]: Dopamine is about scrolling up and
[Guest]: Scrolling down how do you deal
[Guest]: With this system and where are the support
[Guest]: For this who is talking about it enough for us
[Guest]: To kind of be like okay
[Guest]: I am also going through this
[Amit Varma]: See one thing
[Amit Varma]: I can answer that how to
[Amit Varma]: Avoid the Monday morning blues
[Amit Varma]: And it's damn easy
[Amit Varma]: You drink so much that you wake up on Tuesday
[Amit Varma]: Right
[Amit Varma]: So there is no question of Monday
[Amit Varma]: This is the best
[Amit Varma]: No no you know
[Amit Varma]: There is this writer called Arthur Brooks
[Amit Varma]: He has also written a book on happiness
[Amit Varma]: But there is this essay of
[Amit Varma]: His that you know with a particular
[Amit Varma]: Insight that made an impact on me where he
[Amit Varma]: Spoke about a study
[Amit Varma]: Which traced the happiness of American
[Amit Varma]: Men through their lives and his thing
[Amit Varma]: Was that their happiness is at its lowest
[Amit Varma]: Point when they are in their
[Amit Varma]: Mid to late 40s and then
[Amit Varma]: It starts going up and the reason
[Amit Varma]: It starts going up is that is around
[Amit Varma]: The time where you know all their lives have been
[Amit Varma]: Conditioned that money will come, success will come
[Amit Varma]: They will be happy that is around
[Amit Varma]: The point that money came, success came
[Amit Varma]: And then they realized that this
[Amit Varma]: Is not happiness and then they turn
[Amit Varma]: To whatever makes them happy and then they
[Amit Varma]: Reach their peaks later and what you
[Amit Varma]: Said about small joys is what I keep
[Amit Varma]: Saying to people like in the
[Amit Varma]: Sense that reaching middle age kind of
[Amit Varma]: Taught me that that you know
[Amit Varma]: Happiness doesn't come from
[Amit Varma]: Achieving goals, happiness
[Amit Varma]: Comes from just seeing what is around you
[Guest]: And finding joy in that
[Guest]: Something as mundane as air conditioning
[Guest]: Which is a miracle
[Guest]: Of modern technology
[Guest]: Absolutely
[Amit Varma]: And yeah so I would say that
[Amit Varma]: At least mentally I have sorted that
[Amit Varma]: Little bit out, I feel frustrated and angry
[Amit Varma]: With myself because I haven't had the discipline
[Amit Varma]: To do many things I want to do
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time I am like thankful
[Unknown]: Every day that I am getting good food
[Amit Varma]: That I am listening to good music
[Amit Varma]: You know
[Amit Varma]: That there is a shower
[Amit Varma]: You know I grew up in the 80s and the 90s
[Unknown]: There was a bucket bath in India
[Guest]: You could never imagine that a time will come
[Guest]: Where we will shower everyday
[Guest]: I have lived 4 years in a hostel
[Amit Varma]: So I am very like totally know this
[Amit Varma]: I know I probably take small joys to an
[Amit Varma]: Extreme because I was hanging out with a couple of
[Amit Varma]: Friends the other day
[Amit Varma]: And I told them about
[Amit Varma]: This awesome coffee body wash
[Unknown]: Which I linked from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: And I said it's the best shower gel I have ever used
[Amit Varma]: And they were both
[Amit Varma]: So amused, why could you
[Guest]: You know so that's probably taking
[Guest]: Small joys to an extreme
[Guest]: You know you are
[Guest]: Amit like I think that even the air
[Guest]: Conditioning as you said right
[Guest]: Most of us are not present for these
[Guest]: Moments because our minds are always
[Guest]: Attuned to be in the future
[Guest]: To the next thing
[Guest]: How many of us are really living
[Guest]: And I say this about myself also
[Guest]: I am not some saint or whatever it is
[Guest]: I have struggled with the same thing
[Guest]: Exactly the same thing
[Guest]: And I have to catch myself
[Guest]: And be like no I am going to be in the present now
[Guest]: You know especially when there are
[Guest]: When I am with people I love
[Guest]: When I am watching something that I really enjoy
[Guest]: When I am having an experience that I have
[Guest]: Waited for
[Guest]: As soon as my mind starts moving to the next thing
[Guest]: I have to hold it back and be like
[Guest]: No
[Guest]: I have waited for this and I am going to enjoy the hell out of it
[Guest]: And it could be a great thing
[Guest]: I love like
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Bathtubs whenever I travel and I get to stay
[Guest]: In a hotel when there is a bathtub
[Guest]: I get so happy
[Guest]: And you know earlier
[Guest]: It was and this is one of the things
[Guest]: Again you start recognizing yourself
[Guest]: Because earlier
[Guest]: I would just be like
[Guest]: I don't have time now
[Guest]: Lots of work has happened so I will do it in the morning
[Guest]: Before going from the hotel
[Guest]: And then in the morning you get late
[Guest]: And then you just miss out
[Guest]: And now if I get to a hotel
[Unknown]: There is a bathtub
[Guest]: I am not missing this opportunity
[Guest]: I am going to
[Guest]: Have this warm lovely
[Guest]: Luxurious bath
[Guest]: In this whatever
[Guest]: Bathtub in a mid
[Guest]: Hotel because
[Guest]: It makes me happy and I know it
[Guest]: And that is happiness also
[Guest]: The happiness can be as
[Guest]: Beautiful and lovely as
[Guest]: Spending time with the people you love
[Guest]: Or pursuing a habit
[Guest]: Or a passion
[Guest]: That you love
[Guest]: Nothing makes me happier than being in a writer's room
[Guest]: And jamming on stories
[Guest]: Happiest high that I have in my work days
[Guest]: At the same time
[Guest]: I have started recognizing that even on
[Guest]: You know tough days at work
[Guest]: Sometimes you know happiness can be
[Guest]: Just the fact that you have someone to share it with
[Guest]: And that's also happiness
[Guest]: It's not about having the
[Guest]: Best day ever but it's also
[Guest]: It's about finding
[Guest]: Something you know lovely in
[Guest]: Even the tough times
[Guest]: And I am not talking about toxic positivity
[Guest]: I am just talking about the fact that we just
[Guest]: Need to be more present to be able
[Guest]: To appreciate
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: Life that we are all leading
[Guest]: We have so much privilege
[Guest]: Constantly we should be
[Guest]: Feeling gratitude
[Guest]: Thank god we have this privilege
[Guest]: In a country where
[Guest]: Maximum number of people don't have this
[Amit Varma]: You know so
[Amit Varma]: Not only should we be feeling gratitude
[Amit Varma]: We should be feeling gratitude at the fact that we are
[Guest]: Feeling gratitude
[Guest]: I am kidding
[Guest]: You are right
[Guest]: There are levels to this of course
[Guest]: There are nuances to this but Amit you are absolutely right
[Guest]: You know we don't have this self awareness
[Guest]: Most of the times right now
[Guest]: You know and again
[Guest]: So much of that really comes down to the fact that we don't
[Guest]: We don't question things
[Guest]: We are just following like
[Guest]: Until I hit
[Guest]: That 30 and then anxiety
[Guest]: Happened and 30 also by the way it's a marker
[Guest]: Right that marker also
[Guest]: Was one of the reasons for the anxiety
[Guest]: That I have hit 30 you know
[Amit Varma]: And what have I done with my life
[Guest]: You kids
[Guest]: What should I say
[Guest]: Yeah so it was
[Guest]: And that those markers and then
[Guest]: The last 5-6 years it's only now that
[Guest]: My self awareness started I am telling you like
[Guest]: I don't know
[Guest]: I mean I will tell you something off the record I want to say it on the record
[Amit Varma]: But I will say something after this
[Amit Varma]: Okay I will wait
[Amit Varma]: I will wait
[Amit Varma]: To hear that no no
[Amit Varma]: You are vegetarian of course but non-veg listeners
[Amit Varma]: May appreciate my feeling
[Amit Varma]: That sometimes I will order a non-veg dish
[Amit Varma]: And I will be eating it and half way through the dish
[Amit Varma]: If you ask me Amit are you eating chicken or mutton
[Amit Varma]: I will then have to look down
[Amit Varma]: And focus to figure that out
[Amit Varma]: Because I am so absent minded
[Amit Varma]: It's like or if you
[Guest]: Might go to a really good restaurant
[Guest]: As long as you are happy about it
[Amit Varma]: Yeah but it's like your mind is somewhere else
[Amit Varma]: It's on that hedonistic treadmill
[Amit Varma]: And you are like
[Amit Varma]: So here is my next question
[Amit Varma]: About mental health that you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: That to a certain extent it could be
[Amit Varma]: Physiological in terms of chemical imbalance
[Amit Varma]: To a certain extent it's not
[Amit Varma]: That there are these roles that we are
[Amit Varma]: Trapped in and all the pressures
[Amit Varma]: We feel for that so now
[Amit Varma]: You know one good advice
[Amit Varma]: About if you have mental health
[Amit Varma]: Issues what should you do is seek help
[Amit Varma]: See a therapist all that
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that
[Amit Varma]: If some of it is caused
[Amit Varma]: By these social pressures
[Amit Varma]: By these situations by these circumstances
[Amit Varma]: What advice would you give
[Amit Varma]: To people listening to this
[Amit Varma]: To be able to mitigate that aspect
[Amit Varma]: Of the problem
[Guest]: You know I think acknowledgement is the first step
[Guest]: It's a very important step
[Guest]: Discomfort is
[Guest]: The first step for
[Guest]: Change
[Guest]: Discomfort is the first step
[Guest]: For
[Guest]: Getting better you know
[Guest]: You have to stay in that discomfort
[Guest]: We are not ready to
[Guest]: It's not easy when your whole life
[Guest]: You believed in one truth
[Guest]: To suddenly be like
[Guest]: Actually there is some other truth
[Guest]: It's so difficult
[Guest]: Even therapy or whatever
[Guest]: You know you take any of these things
[Guest]: But you learn it's not easy for you to process
[Guest]: You are talking about things that you
[Guest]: Really like buried deep
[Guest]: Inside and then you just
[Guest]: Hidden them inside and repressed them inside
[Guest]: This is not you know
[Guest]: I am not this
[Guest]: To for me Amit
[Guest]: It sounds like it's not a big deal
[Guest]: It might not be a big deal for a lot of people
[Guest]: But to me to be told that my entire identity
[Guest]: The reason that I have so much
[Guest]: Issues in my life is because I am a man
[Guest]: Was a slap on my face
[Guest]: Because all my life I have tried
[Guest]: Not to be one
[Guest]: And when I say not to be a man
[Guest]: I am talking about gender roles right now
[Guest]: I am not going to fit
[Guest]: Into what a man's roles
[Guest]: And I realized that I was
[Guest]: Even trying consciously
[Guest]: To not emulate
[Guest]: What I thought a man was supposed to be
[Guest]: Because of what I saw my father be
[Guest]: I was still
[Guest]: Living the narrative of a man only
[Guest]: And it was such a difficult thing for me to grapple
[Guest]: With so difficult
[Guest]: So it is you have to be
[Guest]: Comfortable with discomfort
[Guest]: You have to be okay with
[Guest]: Pain you have to
[Guest]: Acknowledge it you have to process it
[Guest]: You have to stay with it
[Guest]: And it's only after that can change begin
[Guest]: Until you are
[Guest]: Until you
[Guest]: Recognize and are
[Guest]: Okay with it
[Guest]: It's okay to
[Guest]: It really is
[Guest]: Okay to be told that
[Guest]: I know it's difficult the pain is very very hard
[Guest]: Sometimes
[Guest]: But it's
[Guest]: Okay
[Guest]: If you find something about yourself
[Guest]: That you may not necessarily like
[Guest]: You don't have to be
[Guest]: Ashamed of yourself
[Guest]: You don't have to look down on yourself
[Guest]: You don't have to judge yourself
[Guest]: We judge others very quickly
[Guest]: But most of all we judge ourselves
[Guest]: The most of all
[Guest]: I mean there is a thing called
[Guest]: In therapy terms
[Guest]: Negative self talk right
[Guest]: I didn't realize I do it
[Guest]: So many times my therapist has said
[Guest]: Stop saying that about yourself
[Guest]: I did this so stupid of me
[Guest]: Why are you saying that
[Guest]: I didn't even realize I have said that
[Guest]: Because in my head I am just like
[Guest]: I did something stupid
[Guest]: No
[Guest]: You are human you have made a mistake and it's okay
[Guest]: Why are you constantly
[Guest]: Telling yourself that you are an idiot
[Guest]: Because you did something
[Guest]: You think is wrong
[Guest]: That's the human experience
[Guest]: It's okay
[Guest]: You know I don't have advice
[Guest]: I don't believe in the idea of
[Guest]: Giving advice I can share my stories
[Unknown]: If that resonate with you
[Guest]: That's amazing
[Guest]: But yeah I just feel like
[Guest]: Everybody has to find what works for them
[Guest]: That's what mental health is
[Guest]: There is no one glove fit all
[Guest]: Solution to mental health
[Guest]: For me when I was going through anxiety
[Guest]: The things that started helping me
[Guest]: So anxiety also happens
[Guest]: When you feel like you are losing control
[Guest]: There is no
[Guest]: Like the pandemic
[Guest]: Why did the pandemic make so many people anxious
[Guest]: Because suddenly you had lost control
[Guest]: Of the way
[Guest]: You lost control of your reality
[Guest]: A life that you were leading till then
[Guest]: Was taken away from you
[Guest]: You don't have any control anymore
[Guest]: The government has control
[Guest]: And you have to just stay in your
[Guest]: Because that's just how it is
[Guest]: We don't even know how long
[Guest]: And you have to cede control
[Guest]: It's very tough to kind of
[Guest]: Constantly trying to control every truth of your life
[Guest]: To kind of have that taken away
[Guest]: So what
[Guest]: My therapist would tell me
[Guest]: And what I started kind of doing was
[Guest]: How do you find little things in your routine
[Guest]: That you can control
[Guest]: So that becomes your thing
[Guest]: I have this
[Guest]: Everything else might be out of my control
[Guest]: But this I have
[Guest]: So reading for me became like a really big
[Guest]: I really picked up reading again
[Guest]: Because I have read over the last two and a half years
[Guest]: In the pandemic particularly
[Guest]: That in the morning
[Guest]: I'd get up and just read
[Guest]: I started waking up really early
[Guest]: And looking at I have a
[Guest]: Fortunately a view of the sunrise
[Guest]: Live opposite RA
[Guest]: So I can see the sun come up from my window
[Guest]: So I just started waking up in the morning
[Guest]: And every morning I just see the sunrise
[Guest]: Because it was just for me it was
[Guest]: Like no matter what happens
[Guest]: With the pandemic this is going to happen every day
[Guest]: This is the truth that will
[Guest]: No matter what
[Guest]: You know it will continue
[Guest]: You know I
[Guest]: I did not speak I used to speak to my mother
[Guest]: Once in a week or twice in a week at that time
[Guest]: I used to think of myself as that busy
[Guest]: In the pandemic I have spoken
[Guest]: Since the pandemic I have spoken to my mother
[Guest]: On video call every single day
[Guest]: In the last three years because
[Guest]: I was so anxious about the fact that
[Guest]: They live in Bahrain and suddenly
[Guest]: You know the flights were
[Guest]: Cancelled and you didn't
[Guest]: Know when your air travel was gone
[Guest]: And my parents were staying separately in Bahrain
[Guest]: And I am staying in Bombay
[Guest]: And I was in
[Guest]: Such a bad place
[Guest]: Such a bad place that I couldn't
[Guest]: Like for the first month of the
[Guest]: Pandemic I am not joking I couldn't get up from my bed
[Guest]: I was just anxious
[Guest]: So badly because I was like what is going to happen to my parents
[Guest]: They are in Bahrain
[Guest]: I am not there to help them
[Guest]: I am not there to you know quote unquote protect them
[Guest]: What choices have I made
[Guest]: In my life that have led to this moment where
[Guest]: The world has stopped and I am away from my parents
[Guest]: It was so tough for me
[Guest]: So tough for me and then I just
[Guest]: You know thought that maybe I should just
[Guest]: Talk to my parents everyday
[Guest]: And then I started having like these video calls with her
[Guest]: I have never done video calls before
[Guest]: And then just seeing my mother's face everyday
[Guest]: My father and I also became closer actually during the pandemic
[Guest]: Just looked at each other
[Guest]: And my brother was in the US
[Guest]: All four of us would get on these video calls and then just
[Guest]: There was so much
[Guest]: I don't know just felt
[Guest]: Peaceful and calm just looking at each other's faces
[Guest]: Doing that you know we are okay
[Guest]: And that's something we could control
[Guest]: We could call each other everyday
[Guest]: Look at each other's faces and feel peaceful
[Guest]: So walking
[Guest]: Was something that I told you
[Guest]: Actually I want to say this on record also
[Guest]: Your episodes really
[Guest]: I am not joking about this
[Guest]: Your episodes really helped me during some
[Guest]: Tough days on the pandemic because
[Guest]: I did not have the
[Guest]: I did not have
[Guest]: The will to
[Guest]: Even go for that walk because I was so in such
[Guest]: Bad shape and then you know
[Guest]: I restarted
[Guest]: When Prem Banekar came on your podcast
[Guest]: And I was like well here is a man I admire
[Guest]: Here is another man I admire and they are going to be talking and it's a long conversation
[Guest]: Maybe this is the reason for me to get out of bed
[Guest]: And I remember that day I went
[Guest]: For this really long walk
[Guest]: And then I came back and I sat in the garden
[Guest]: Of my building where I had never done before
[Guest]: My building had a garden and I just never sat there
[Guest]: And I sat, they have a swing
[Guest]: And I just sat for the swing and till like
[Guest]: I think till the
[Guest]: Episode had ended I just sat there
[Guest]: And I was just breathed a little more
[Guest]: And I was like okay
[Guest]: There is something to do, something to look forward to
[Guest]: Something to break the monotony of the pandemic
[Guest]: During that time so you have to
[Guest]: Find what works for you you know
[Guest]: And everybody like my wife
[Guest]: She also got very anxious during the pandemic
[Guest]: And I can say this because she is so comfortable
[Guest]: Talking about it
[Guest]: But she took to painting
[Guest]: And she was
[Guest]: She has become a master painter
[Guest]: She started an Instagram page and she put a painting
[Guest]: People are like please sell this to us and she is like I don't want to sell this
[Guest]: I am just doing it for you know
[Guest]: We are just saying anxiety journaling she was saying anxiety painting
[Guest]: And it was just
[Guest]: Gorgeous paintings of flowers and what not
[Guest]: I am like how are you, what
[Guest]: My pandemic is
[Guest]: We are just struggling to reach 4 pages
[Guest]: Your pandemic is you making this
[Guest]: Turn your passion into this high art
[Guest]: What is going on so it is
[Guest]: That was also like
[Guest]: How great you are dealing with your
[Guest]: Anxiety and look like how tough it is
[Guest]: For me but as I said everybody has different ways
[Guest]: Of dealing with it and we just need to
[Guest]: Allow ourselves to find what it is that
[Guest]: Can help us the most
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: The subject that you have spoken about elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: Also about creativity as therapy
[Amit Varma]: You know you mentioned that
[Unknown]: Daisy took to painting and that really helped her
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: You know and I have heard other people talk about
[Amit Varma]: How writing can be like therapy especially people
[Amit Varma]: Who are kind of journaling everyday
[Amit Varma]: And all that so and I would
[Amit Varma]: Imagine that it would
[Amit Varma]: Not just be actual creativity
[Amit Varma]: Alone that would be therapeutic
[Amit Varma]: But even reading
[Amit Varma]: Books or watching the stories of others
[Amit Varma]: Could also help what is your
[Guest]: Sort of experience
[Guest]: I have watched so many sitcoms I finished like
[Guest]: Schitt's Creek I think everybody
[Guest]: Has watched Schitt's Creek during the pandemic
[Guest]: You know Kim's Convenience I went back to
[Guest]: The office saw Parks and Rec
[Guest]: I had finished I had not seen Parks and Rec
[Guest]: End to end I used to I had seen a lot of episodes
[Guest]: In between I saw all of it
[Guest]: For first 6 months every
[Guest]: I was just finishing sitcoms
[Guest]: Because I just needed to
[Guest]: And it was the opposite in the beginning you know in the beginning
[Guest]: I had to make sense of what was happening
[Guest]: I just I needed my
[Guest]: Mind to make sense of like
[Guest]: What is happening and I am somebody who needed
[Guest]: Who had kind of
[Guest]: So I am someone who was very
[Guest]: Active on Twitter and then when
[Guest]: China thing happened I had
[Guest]: Already my anxiety so my
[Guest]: Anxiety now works in a way where it is
[Guest]: A warning to me the moment I started getting anxious I am just
[Guest]: Like okay there is why
[Guest]: Why am I getting anxious what is going to happen and it
[Guest]: Is almost like a prediction for me that there is something
[Guest]: Whether in my life and in this case
[Guest]: The world that there is something so I started getting
[Guest]: Anxiety after reading like I was like
[Guest]: And I started going deep into like
[Guest]: Okay what is this going to mean and I knew
[Guest]: At that time that covid is
[Guest]: So I am actually making my anxiety work for me
[Guest]: Like become very smart with it like
[Guest]: I knew that covid is going to come to India
[Guest]: Also I realized that the way it is shaping
[Guest]: Up it is not far away people were
[Guest]: Like still not okay whatever whatever
[Guest]: I had given my team
[Guest]: Work from home
[Guest]: My team was bunch of 10
[Guest]: People at that time now we are 26 but at that time
[Guest]: Just 10 young people but most of them
[Guest]: Are from different parts of the country so
[Guest]: Because of my anxiety because of what I was going
[Guest]: Through you know I kind of told
[Guest]: My team to go from work from home
[Guest]: And that also happened because
[Guest]: Parents of one those kids were also getting
[Guest]: Very anxious I said okay let's just start work from home
[Guest]: When at a time when nobody
[Guest]: Was at that time kind of doing it
[Guest]: The decision I am really proud
[Guest]: Of is the fact that I just asked
[Guest]: The kids who were from different parts of the country
[Guest]: To go back to their homes I was just like
[Guest]: I think the flights I don't know when this will
[Guest]: Hit us when if it hits
[Guest]: Us and we get into lockdowns in India also
[Guest]: Flights will stop and you will not be able to go
[Guest]: To your homes so I didn't go to my own
[Guest]: Home which I then later
[Guest]: Really regretted but I
[Guest]: You know send my kids to you
[Guest]: Know their homes and I am so glad
[Guest]: That you know the anxiety worked for me in that sense
[Guest]: But yeah so I feel like
[Guest]: Everybody
[Guest]: Has you know a
[Guest]: Different way of
[Guest]: Dealing with it I have
[Guest]: Found you know again as you
[Guest]: Said reading for me was
[Guest]: I would
[Guest]: Get lost in the
[Guest]: I picked up fiction so
[Guest]: And I was not reading fiction I was reading
[Guest]: A lot of non-fiction for a very long time
[Guest]: I also made a really stupid tweet about that once you
[Guest]: Start reading fiction you can never read non-fiction I got really
[Guest]: Trolled for it during the pandemic
[Guest]: Really trolled
[Guest]: Shiv Ramdas was the first one who said
[Guest]: You are an idiot
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: But I
[Guest]: Picked up fiction and it just helped me get lost
[Guest]: In the lives of others
[Guest]: I also you know sorry I also said
[Guest]: I forgot to tell about that when the pandemic
[Guest]: Started because I needed to make sense of it
[Guest]: I was like what other
[Guest]: Event has happened in the world that was
[Guest]: Unprecedented and my head was world war
[Guest]: I was like I have while
[Guest]: You know there is there were people
[Guest]: Who also lived through the world war
[Guest]: World war 1 and world war 2 and while
[Guest]: I had seen I mean of course everybody knows about it
[Guest]: In whatever way I knew
[Guest]: There was a documentary on Netflix and I was like let me
[Guest]: Just go watch this whole documentary so I saw
[Guest]: 10 hour documentary on the world wars
[Guest]: And it gave me
[Guest]: So much context in feeling better
[Guest]: Later because what it did was it helped
[Guest]: Me understand well you think
[Guest]: Of the world war as this one event right
[Guest]: But it was also from
[Guest]: You know x
[Guest]: Year to x year it was
[Guest]: A period of 5 to 6 years
[Guest]: Where people were living
[Guest]: In war in war
[Guest]: Time and I was just thinking
[Guest]: You know because I need to make sense I
[Guest]: Immediately realized that there is going to be
[Guest]: This pandemic is not getting over in 3 weeks or 3 months
[Guest]: It is going to go on
[Guest]: So a lot of people had anxiety later
[Guest]: When it didn't stop I had anxiety initial
[Guest]: To prepare for the fact that 2-3 years
[Guest]: Is going to go on and I was reading
[Guest]: Some of the top science writers
[Guest]: Zainab Tufekhi
[Guest]: This
[Guest]: New Yorker writer I forgot his name
[Guest]: Fantastic writer from New Yorker
[Guest]: Writing a book just incredible
[Guest]: Incredible
[Guest]: You know writer so just reading their things
[Guest]: And preparing myself and then just needed to make
[Guest]: Sense of the world that you know people
[Guest]: Have in the past also gone through
[Guest]: Historically it is really
[Guest]: Troubled times and they made it to the other side
[Guest]: We are also going through these troubled times I am sure
[Guest]: We are going to make it that was my way of dealing
[Guest]: With it content storytelling filmmaking
[Guest]: Always becomes my go to
[Guest]: You know reading became again
[Guest]: Stories just getting lost in the stories
[Guest]: Became a whole thing journalism
[Guest]: Journaling for me
[Guest]: I when I started journaling
[Guest]: It is just a lot of negative emotion that I put out
[Guest]: So while it is cathartic
[Guest]: For a lot of people to be able to let it all out
[Guest]: I see for me it just becomes a little bit
[Guest]: More like
[Guest]: I feel like I go deeper
[Guest]: Into it so I just you know I did this
[Guest]: Another one lovely thing which
[Guest]: Really helped me I my mother
[Guest]: I would tell my mother to
[Guest]: My mother would also
[Guest]: From the Guru Granth Sahib she kind of
[Guest]: You know read
[Guest]: From and I
[Guest]: Just say that you know why don't you send me every morning
[Guest]: A voice note because I really needed help I didn't
[Guest]: Know what to do I was like can you send me a voice note
[Guest]: Every morning from something from the Guru Granth Sahib
[Guest]: And just explain it in your own words
[Guest]: She does that quite a lot you know
[Guest]: So then yeah I have this bunch of voice
[Guest]: Notes from my mother during the pandemic for like
[Guest]: Two weeks three weeks three weeks when a very tough
[Guest]: Time every morning I'd wake up I'd see the
[Guest]: Sun I'd hear my mother's voice note
[Guest]: I would read a book and then
[Guest]: I would feel a little bit more prepared about the day
[Guest]: So it's
[Guest]: Creative I mean again I think that
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: Wouldn't want to say as if
[Guest]: It's everybody can you
[Guest]: Know creativity can help everyone because honestly
[Guest]: I don't know you know
[Guest]: It is it is said that it helps everyone
[Guest]: I have seen it help me in
[Guest]: My own life I've seen it help
[Guest]: My wife but at the same time not
[Guest]: Everybody needs to have that
[Guest]: Pressure of kind of being creative
[Guest]: If you have
[Guest]: Cooking is such a thing that
[Guest]: A lot of people took to
[Guest]: During the pandemic to really get
[Guest]: Over the anxieties and I'm not talking about like
[Guest]: Banana bread and you know or whatever
[Guest]: But genuinely so many
[Guest]: Friends that I know so many
[Guest]: Men that I know were like you know washing utensils
[Guest]: Became like a peaceful
[Guest]: Activity for so many of us you know
[Guest]: So many people I was for me
[Guest]: So I just I just started enjoying
[Guest]: Washing dishes as I just like the
[Guest]: Routine of doing it the thing that you can control
[Guest]: That there's a stain you finish it and
[Guest]: Go away it just helps you the anxiety
[Guest]: So it could be different things
[Guest]: You have to you know find what works for you
[Guest]: But of course you know take that
[Guest]: Advice from a trained professional
[Guest]: And you know
[Guest]: When it comes to lived experience it's you
[Guest]: Will always have a different experience from somebody
[Amit Varma]: Else so my next question is
[Amit Varma]: About comes from this lovely piece you wrote
[Amit Varma]: About the pretense
[Amit Varma]: Of being okay right
[Amit Varma]: Where you've sort of
[Amit Varma]: Spoken about
[Amit Varma]: How you know there's a certain
[Amit Varma]: It's almost as if you're role playing
[Amit Varma]: For the world and for ourselves and
[Amit Varma]: It's a constant act and we're
[Amit Varma]: Not even aware of it ourselves and
[Amit Varma]: You speak about it you know
[Amit Varma]: You bring up the Will Smith
[Unknown]: Incident you know the slap at the
[Amit Varma]: Oscars and you know you
[Amit Varma]: Quoted the writer Heidi Moore
[Amit Varma]: About how what that actually did was
[Amit Varma]: It broke that fourth wall where
[Amit Varma]: Suddenly Will Smith is not playing a role of being
[Amit Varma]: Himself but he's come out
[Amit Varma]: Of that and he's showing whatever so
[Amit Varma]: Even if you find it ugly and rude
[Amit Varma]: Or repulsive or whatever
[Amit Varma]: He's broken that fourth wall and there is something
[Amit Varma]: There and something had happened to a friend
[Amit Varma]: Of mine about which I wrote a newsletter post
[Amit Varma]: Also where he was at a
[Amit Varma]: Disco and
[Amit Varma]: He was at the stage where he was at
[Amit Varma]: The stage of weight loss where his
[Amit Varma]: Pants weren't exactly fitting
[Amit Varma]: Right so you know they would
[Amit Varma]: Keep slipping and he would pull them up
[Amit Varma]: So he was dancing with a girl
[Amit Varma]: And the pant fell down
[Amit Varma]: And he was damn embarrassed and the girl said
[Amit Varma]: Don't worry that's happened to me also
[Amit Varma]: Which is possibly just a way of making him feel better
[Amit Varma]: And my friend was really embarrassed about it
[Amit Varma]: And I was like you know what
[Amit Varma]: This is actually a beautiful moment
[Amit Varma]: Because in a
[Amit Varma]: Disco you know you have
[Amit Varma]: That whole dance going on
[Amit Varma]: Everything is so performative
[Amit Varma]: Everybody is kind of playing a role
[Amit Varma]: Nobody is really being themselves unless they are too drunk
[Amit Varma]: In which case they are being too themselves
[Amit Varma]: And the dropping of the pant is
[Amit Varma]: Almost like a delightful moment
[Amit Varma]: Of kind of breaking through
[Amit Varma]: That where you know
[Amit Varma]: You are kind of embarrassed but
[Amit Varma]: You know but everyone around you
[Amit Varma]: Because of mirror neurons
[Amit Varma]: Because of suddenly they can empathize
[Amit Varma]: You know every man is imagining fuck that could have been me
[Amit Varma]: Right for a moment that is broken
[Amit Varma]: And there is a certain charm to that
[Amit Varma]: Do you think about this sometimes
[Amit Varma]: That we are all
[Amit Varma]: Playing a role for ourselves
[Amit Varma]: And for the people in our lives
[Amit Varma]: And that there should be
[Amit Varma]: Sort of an intentional effort
[Amit Varma]: Of getting past it
[Amit Varma]: Of just you know in whatever way we can
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand
[Amit Varma]: There is that larger
[Amit Varma]: Layer that we break through
[Amit Varma]: Which is a layer of oh I am expected to be a man
[Amit Varma]: I am supposed to be this and it's a social thing
[Amit Varma]: And it's all encompassing
[Amit Varma]: But let's say we get past that
[Amit Varma]: But even then there is that
[Amit Varma]: Dilemma about what is the authentic self
[Amit Varma]: You know you might think you know yourself
[Amit Varma]: But maybe you are playing a role to yourself
[Amit Varma]: So you know and
[Amit Varma]: Given the kind of self reflection that you have done
[Amit Varma]: And that your writing shows
[Amit Varma]: You know what are your thoughts
[Guest]: It's a very existential question
[Guest]: You know and
[Guest]: I honestly feel like
[Guest]: Everyone will have a different answer
[Guest]: To this purely because
[Guest]: Okay as an example
[Guest]: I have and I will talk about
[Guest]: This purely because
[Guest]: This is just you know
[Guest]: The most easy way for me to communicate
[Guest]: This but
[Guest]: I have just never understood
[Guest]: Why we are
[Guest]: Why we have hierarchies at work
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: And I say hierarchies I don't
[Guest]: You know I don't begrudge experience
[Guest]: I think experience is great
[Guest]: I think we should give a certain kind of respect
[Guest]: To experience and lean into
[Guest]: Experience wherever possible
[Guest]: But why is the youngest employee
[Guest]: At an office treated differently
[Guest]: From the oldest employee at the office
[Guest]: Or the person may not be the oldest
[Guest]: But the person in the
[Guest]: A position of a certain salary
[Guest]: Why is the salary
[Guest]: A marker of the kind of respect that you give people
[Guest]: I have never understood that
[Guest]: Why is it that we
[Guest]: In the same office
[Guest]: The same person can speak to their boss
[Guest]: In a certain way and speak to their subordinate
[Guest]: In a certain way
[Guest]: It's never made sense to me
[Guest]: In fact it's made me so
[Guest]: It's really made me angry
[Guest]: Many many times
[Guest]: We have a team
[Guest]: You know of
[Guest]: People from all over the country
[Guest]: We also have an office boy
[Guest]: And I don't again
[Guest]: It's conditioning
[Guest]: That when you're taking a picture of the whole team
[Guest]: The team is not calling
[Guest]: The office boy. Why?
[Guest]: He's also 23
[Guest]: He's also a young person like us and he's part of our company
[Guest]: Why are we not
[Guest]: Calling him for the picture? Now again I don't want to
[Guest]: Make this again
[Guest]: I don't want to make it sound like right now I'm like
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: It's not about I mean right now
[Guest]: I'm not even talking about class or you know
[Guest]: Cast I'm talking while of course that plays a part
[Guest]: In it. I'm just
[Guest]: Talking about the roles
[Guest]: That we are conditioned
[Guest]: To you know
[Guest]: Play right?
[Guest]: In all these systems. As an example
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: Accounts team you will not call for a picture
[Guest]: Right? So it's also the same thing
[Guest]: It's just like they work in accounts
[Guest]: They're not like as fun as we are or whatever
[Guest]: It is and it is in different ways
[Guest]: Sometimes ageism is a thing that you know you kind of have
[Guest]: And you don't call the
[Guest]: You know people who are actually older as part
[Guest]: Of whatever it is right?
[Guest]: But overall I just see these
[Guest]: Why is it that
[Guest]: And I don't want to be
[Guest]: I don't want to sound like a bleeding heart
[Guest]: Or you know whatever. I don't want to sound like I am
[Guest]: Even when I sound it
[Guest]: It just sounds like I don't know
[Guest]: What do I think of myself but
[Guest]: I just don't. But it's true
[Guest]: I just don't like it when
[Guest]: The watchman or the
[Guest]: In any of my societies calls me sir
[Guest]: I am like why are you calling me sir?
[Guest]: My name is this
[Guest]: I know your name. You will call me by my name right?
[Guest]: So you know they get awkward about it
[Guest]: And I feel so bad
[Guest]: And again I am not
[Guest]: It just sounds like
[Guest]: This whatever bleeding heart savior
[Guest]: Kind of a. No that's not the narrative
[Guest]: I just find in any
[Guest]: Situation just it to be horrible
[Guest]: That we have these social
[Guest]: Structures, these social
[Guest]: Constructs that
[Guest]: We believe in and that we
[Guest]: You know put. Why
[Guest]: Is it I mean of course these are
[Guest]: Casteist things but you know
[Guest]: Why do we have separate utensils for people
[Guest]: Who come from outside and you know
[Guest]: So it is
[Guest]: The same person in your family
[Guest]: Can be the sweetest to everyone
[Guest]: But suddenly when there is a worker who comes from outside
[Guest]: You will you know be a
[Guest]: Certain way with that person because you have an idea
[Guest]: These people
[Guest]: And it's not
[Guest]: Just as I said casteism it is anything
[Guest]: It can be just power. I think power dynamics
[Guest]: Overall everywhere is just the reason
[Guest]: While some of it is classism
[Guest]: Casteism you know different different things
[Amit Varma]: Religion, gender all of these
[Guest]: Issues that kind of you know play
[Guest]: But a lot of it is just power structures
[Guest]: Everything comes down to power
[Guest]: And the roles we play come down to like
[Guest]: Who is more power. Respect the elders
[Guest]: Always. Elders, elders, elders
[Guest]: Where are you elder?
[Guest]: In every situation it is decided
[Guest]: How to respect
[Guest]: How much respect you should get
[Guest]: It will depend upon you know how
[Guest]: What is your level
[Guest]: Of you know
[Guest]: Being big or bigger
[Guest]: Or power
[Guest]: And that is why I think that's the pretense
[Guest]: What power do we have
[Guest]: You think
[Guest]: That you know having x amount of money
[Guest]: Gives you power
[Guest]: You know if
[Guest]: There is a pandemic you are home
[Guest]: Where you have a helicopter to go
[Guest]: As an example
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: There is no such thing as true power
[Guest]: There is genuinely
[Guest]: This idea also of power
[Guest]: Is such a stupid idea
[Guest]: Who has true power
[Guest]: Even if you say that
[Guest]: This government has x amount
[Guest]: Of power. Everyday they have to fight
[Guest]: For it. Is that really power?
[Guest]: You know. And we are all going to die
[Guest]: And this world
[Guest]: Is like dying. Climate change is happening
[Guest]: What is power?
[Guest]: What are you going to do with this idea of power?
[Guest]: What do you get in a situation where you
[Guest]: Feel yourself as the bigger person
[Guest]: You show someone
[Guest]: Smaller than you
[Guest]: What is the joy that you get? There is no joy in that
[Guest]: In fact it is just a stupid thing
[Guest]: That you kind of do because it is a role that you think you have to play
[Guest]: Because somebody played that role
[Guest]: With you when you were in that place
[Guest]: I didn't bully
[Guest]: Anybody because
[Guest]: Even if I got bullied
[Guest]: I didn't bully someone
[Guest]: On the other hand there are people who bully
[Guest]: When ragging used to happen in college
[Guest]: Even people who I used to really respect
[Guest]: You know suddenly would rag and hit
[Guest]: Juniors. I would be like why do you do this?
[Guest]: This is the system
[Guest]: Everyone ragged us
[Guest]: So we have to do the same. I am like why?
[Guest]: Why doesn't it stop with you?
[Guest]: And on the other hand I have a friend
[Guest]: Who is a very dear friend
[Guest]: But had so much love and respect for
[Guest]: Because he was the one who in his
[Guest]: We used to call it GTs
[Guest]: Get-togethers but whatever
[Guest]: Maharashtra GT
[Guest]: Bangalore GT
[Guest]: So seniors from the same GT
[Guest]: Would hit juniors from the same GT
[Guest]: If somebody from another GT
[Guest]: Comes and rags you then there is a
[Amit Varma]: Panga and a war that happens
[Guest]: These boys belong to us. Exactly
[Guest]: How can you hit them?
[Guest]: But you know
[Guest]: We used to beat
[Guest]: First you need to learn subservience
[Guest]: You need to learn that
[Guest]: I am your senior so I need to be spoken to
[Guest]: In a certain respect and you will do whatever
[Guest]: The hell I want you to do and then I will be your best friend
[Guest]: But first you have to go through
[Guest]: Torture for me to then come to
[Guest]: Tough love. What is this nonsense?
[Guest]: And I just
[Guest]: So much respect for a friend who kind of fought
[Guest]: With his entire GT and said
[Guest]: We are not going to beat our juniors
[Guest]: So what if he got beaten up
[Guest]: And he finally stopped the system
[Guest]: And that is
[Guest]: I mean I don't know if it continued after
[Guest]: He went and somebody in the third year said
[Guest]: No I want to continue it. I hope not
[Guest]: But the fact that there was a person
[Guest]: Who fought back and you know
[Guest]: It was a close bunch of 5-6 people from
[Guest]: Bangalore GT who just decided they will not do it
[Guest]: Karnataka GT. We will not do it
[Guest]: And so much respect
[Guest]: So it is
[Guest]: The buck has to stop somewhere
[Guest]: The pretence has to stop somewhere
[Guest]: Why are we pretending? What are you getting out of it?
[Guest]: What do you get out of these
[Guest]: Power structures which make you feel better
[Guest]: Instead of that just spend your time
[Guest]: With people you love
[Guest]: Spend your time doing things that you care about
[Guest]: Instead of these false senses
[Guest]: Of like
[Guest]: What will make you feel
[Guest]: Superior in some way or the other
[Guest]: So all of these places
[Guest]: All of these structures where there is
[Guest]: A hierarchy. I just
[Guest]: Reject them. And again I don't feel
[Guest]: Like. I don't say this. I feel
[Guest]: Like you know
[Guest]: We still have
[Guest]: Designations in Yuva. It's not like we don't have that
[Guest]: I also recognize that
[Guest]: Everybody is so conditioned to believe that okay this is
[Guest]: How we are unlocking the next level
[Guest]: Of our career if there is a designation shift
[Guest]: So great. I told you like I mean
[Guest]: Again I can't talk about it on the podcast but
[Guest]: The way I think of leadership
[Guest]: In terms of I don't want to stay you know
[Guest]: In Yuva as a leader for very long and I
[Guest]: Want to continue. Pass it on to the next
[Guest]: Young person. Why should I be
[Guest]: CEO of a company
[Guest]: Called Yuva for x amount of years
[Guest]: What is the power in calling yourself CEO
[Guest]: I'm still going to be founder. I'm still going to. It's still my company
[Guest]: But someone else can
[Guest]: Genuinely run it as a
[Guest]: Young thought maybe much better than I
[Guest]: Could. And I need to pass the baton
[Guest]: On because if I have the privilege
[Guest]: What am I you know doing with it if not
[Guest]: Passing it on you know and
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: If I'm stupid enough to think that
[Guest]: I'm only here because of my own work
[Guest]: That is actually
[Guest]: Just that's just nothing
[Guest]: But narcissism. There is
[Guest]: Nobody makes it on
[Guest]: Their own
[Guest]: You could have systems you can say
[Guest]: That have been against you but at the
[Guest]: Same time there are also been places which have been
[Guest]: For you. There have been that few people who
[Guest]: Give you that you
[Guest]: Know in small
[Guest]: Different ways. I can't you know
[Guest]: I just can't
[Guest]: Forget the kind
[Guest]: Kindness of people
[Guest]: At different places in my life and could be
[Guest]: Something really small. I told you what
[Guest]: One of my friends told me just such a kind
[Guest]: Thing that I needed at a tough time
[Guest]: That you know somebody just said something
[Guest]: And I just felt like okay. Thank you for saying that
[Guest]: You didn't need to say that to me, but you've done
[Guest]: It and I feel so much gratitude that there
[Guest]: Are people like that who could you know
[Guest]: There was a time where my brother
[Guest]: Was in Bombay and he was looking for a job and he
[Guest]: Had come from
[Guest]: And he was going through a lot. I told you it's not in a good
[Guest]: Place you know mental health wise and
[Guest]: And I just didn't know because he
[Guest]: Was in a he wanted in a different industry. I
[Guest]: Don't know how to get him a job. I was in just
[Guest]: Two or three years. I put out like a post and they
[Guest]: Just people who
[Guest]: Because of whatever they kind of thought about
[Guest]: Me just
[Guest]: I don't consider like even friends but just
[Guest]: Some acquaintances that I've been polite
[Guest]: And kind with who just
[Guest]: Said give it to us and we'll pass it on and
[Guest]: I just did it and someone somewhere
[Guest]: Found him a job and I was like I don't even
[Guest]: Know you that well, but you've just really
[Guest]: Gone out there and
[Guest]: I when it's you know, I'd be like thank you for
[Guest]: Being and they're just like no you're a decent person
[Guest]: And so I've also seen it, you know
[Guest]: Just coming back that
[Guest]: Decency or whatever and a very basic
[Guest]: And this is not something to
[Guest]: It's sad that this is the
[Guest]: Bar the bar is that it's just
[Guest]: Decent that is this so much gratitude
[Guest]: That people have you know
[Guest]: It's so sad. There's so many times, you know, I've had
[Guest]: Like on my sets or something, you know people coming up
[Guest]: And say, you know key
[Guest]: Producers don't behave in
[Guest]: This way, you know you
[Guest]: Thank you for like being nice and I'm like that's just
[Guest]: It is sad that this these words
[Guest]: Are being said because
[Guest]: I'm just being a decent
[Guest]: Human being. I'm not doing anything extra
[Guest]: You know, but I used to have so much gratitude
[Guest]: For people who who in this
[Guest]: World, which is so toxic
[Guest]: You know would would be
[Guest]: Mind in different ways that I used to I mean I
[Guest]: Stopped it now and I wish I had
[Guest]: More time to do it but for about 7 years
[Guest]: In my life between 2000
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: 11 to 2018 or
[Guest]: 19 I mean after you I had to stop everything is so
[Guest]: Much work that I was going and making
[Guest]: Putting it together, but I used to send this
[Guest]: Annual letter of thank you
[Guest]: And I started with like I started
[Guest]: By thanking I think what 25
[Guest]: 30 people
[Guest]: You know in that year where I was feeling grateful
[Guest]: You know, I'm in Bombay. I think I'm in a good place
[Guest]: And thank you for all the people who have like been
[Guest]: There so far and who've kind of been nice to me
[Guest]: And I'd give my you know
[Guest]: Life lessons or whatever to people
[Guest]: This is what I learned in the year. Thank you. And
[Guest]: And then by the by the
[Guest]: End of it it was some you know, like I think
[Guest]: 400 500 people
[Guest]: Who were there from 200 I never
[Guest]: Spoken to them since 2011 or something but every
[Guest]: Year, I would send my annual thank
[Guest]: You note you were kind to me once I
[Guest]: Just need you to I need to tell you you are a
[Guest]: Great person. Please continue being kind to
[Guest]: Others, you know, and and kindness
[Guest]: Matters, you know, and it's just
[Guest]: Still something like sometimes a lot of people come to
[Guest]: Me and say did you did I do something bad
[Guest]: If you remove me for your list. I said no, I don't have
[Guest]: I'm not sent it out in the last five years
[Guest]: I'm sorry. It's not that I've removed you
[Amit Varma]: I don't remove anyone once they're on the list. See all
[Amit Varma]: These people have been kind to you and now they're feeling
[Amit Varma]: Anxiety. Why aren't they on the list? What happened?
[Guest]: What happened?
[Guest]: So so
[Guest]: But but yeah, I just feel like
[Guest]: We need to acknowledge those people who are
[Guest]: You saying it's tough to be attending and I I completely
[Guest]: Agree on it. It is very tough to be authentic
[Guest]: You know the world wants to
[Guest]: Fit into boxes. It will try everything
[Guest]: To ensure that you're in one
[Guest]: They will every little pressure
[Guest]: Every pressure from everywhere
[Guest]: Will will will try to do that
[Guest]: But I can tell you that
[Guest]: If you have privilege if you have a little bit of
[Guest]: Power and in my life, I've seen that the
[Guest]: Moment I've had these privileges and powers
[Guest]: Use it to do something good
[Guest]: Because what is the point otherwise, right?
[Guest]: I've started Yuva as a
[Guest]: Company and the kind of culture we have
[Guest]: The reason that we have this culture right now is
[Guest]: Because I never got this culture in you know
[Guest]: And while again Yashraj was
[Guest]: Still a place which was really like kind to
[Guest]: Me but culturally I just
[Guest]: Feel like what we are trying to do at Yuva is
[Guest]: Not something I've gotten anywhere and today
[Guest]: The kind of young people who work with us, you know
[Guest]: We've it's a four-year company
[Guest]: About
[Guest]: Seven people have been here from three plus years
[Guest]: You know and and all of them
[Guest]: Started at 23-24 and they're now
[Guest]: 27 and some of them are now in leadership positions
[Guest]: You're getting great money also and
[Guest]: They're just not leaving and touch wood and the reason
[Guest]: For that is they just they they have had
[Guest]: Different jobs and they're like we will never
[Guest]: Have a place which as a culture
[Guest]: Like this right and it is
[Guest]: And they've created that they have
[Guest]: Bought into that idea that this culture is important
[Guest]: So it's not just me saying that
[Guest]: Because you know everybody else has to
[Guest]: Buy into that idea and be that kind
[Guest]: And nice to each other we don't touch
[Guest]: Wood again we don't have any
[Guest]: Politics at Yuva why should we
[Guest]: Because we don't we are very honest and transparent
[Guest]: In the systems that we have there is no politics
[Guest]: No one's bitching about anybody else at least
[Guest]: At least not that I know of right but
[Guest]: Like I don't you know you see it toxic
[Guest]: Teams you see what is toxic in
[Guest]: This team there is just a lot of love
[Guest]: And empathy for each other I see
[Guest]: That I see people stepping up for
[Guest]: Each other I see people looking out
[Guest]: For each other this is you know
[Guest]: Just small little things that I see that
[Guest]: Just makes me so happy like this boy who
[Guest]: I really you know
[Guest]: Adore if he hears this who is
[Guest]: From Kolkata and he's
[Guest]: Been with us now for two and a half years and he's still
[Guest]: 22 so he's been with us since college
[Guest]: He was part of the first roadshow then he
[Guest]: You know he got a job which
[Guest]: Was making a lot more we couldn't afford
[Guest]: That at that point of time now he's grown
[Guest]: And he's got more money now but he's trusted
[Guest]: Us you know he's very smart very smart kid
[Guest]: And he's trusted I feel like his talent with us he feels
[Guest]: Like I oversell his talent but he's
[Guest]: Very talented and he had
[Guest]: His birthday you know and he
[Guest]: Was first birthday away from home
[Guest]: You know and I was just
[Guest]: I wanted to and I was like
[Guest]: What are you doing he's like I'm not doing anything and I wanted
[Guest]: To kind of that day I had to
[Guest]: I think I was traveling or something I wanted to be with
[Guest]: Him but I couldn't I told my team I said like
[Guest]: Guys first birthday you all have
[Guest]: To you know take him out etc and it was
[Guest]: Not like meant to be like just over
[Guest]: In lunch and said it and that night
[Guest]: All the other young people took him out
[Guest]: Yeah whatever class they had they all cancelled
[Guest]: And they were just they celebrated went to
[Guest]: Marine Drive because he said I never seen Marine Drive
[Guest]: So they all went to Marine Drive with him and chilled
[Guest]: With him I saw in the stories and I was just like this is so
[Guest]: Sweet you didn't have to do it
[Guest]: I just said it upar upar se but they
[Guest]: Left everything said yes we will do it and that's the
[Guest]: You know touch wood like that's the culture that
[Guest]: We have at Yuva and I've not had that
[Guest]: Culture you know and any of the organization
[Guest]: People kind of looking out for each other in this way
[Guest]: You know but why can't that be a culture
[Guest]: So again these pretenses are
[Guest]: There because we have
[Guest]: Lived in a world where people have
[Guest]: You know lauded these pretenses
[Guest]: Over us
[Guest]: It is not easy to break through these pretenses
[Guest]: It's really hard work I've not talked
[Guest]: Enough about you know some of the
[Guest]: Really tough times that I've faced in
[Guest]: My work environments but
[Guest]: I have faced a lot of tough times
[Guest]: Including my own company in year one at Yuva
[Guest]: Was a disaster I
[Guest]: Can acknowledge it now
[Guest]: But it was a just
[Guest]: My understanding
[Guest]: Of what empathy should look like at the
[Guest]: Workplace just was a
[Guest]: Absolute wrong decision
[Guest]: I think empathy should come with
[Guest]: Also professionalism and discipline
[Guest]: I had completely
[Guest]: Ignored that aspect of you know
[Guest]: Work and just said like
[Guest]: If as long as there is empathy
[Guest]: In the team it's a great team but obviously
[Guest]: It was a great team but it was not a team that was
[Guest]: Working as hard it should be
[Guest]: So it's a big disaster
[Guest]: I failed spectacularly
[Guest]: As like a leader or entrepreneur in the first
[Guest]: Year and a half but then I've
[Guest]: Learned from mistakes tried to
[Guest]: Re you know kind of had
[Guest]: A 2.0 of
[Guest]: Yuva you know and try to get
[Guest]: New people try to try and now it's
[Guest]: Worked you know touch wood now three and a half years it's been
[Guest]: Now where we have a very solid
[Guest]: Team and very solid work culture
[Guest]: But yeah it's tough
[Guest]: No one says it's easy but when you hit
[Guest]: Go to the other side it's worth
[Guest]: It it's worth it in such I'm
[Guest]: Able to be here on a workday because my team
[Guest]: Is kick ass I've told them I'm
[Guest]: On your podcast and I don't even have
[Guest]: To like and it's not like you know anybody
[Guest]: Is like oh look at this he's the CEO
[Guest]: Of the company and he's going and chilling in a podcast
[Guest]: I have to work nothing like that
[Guest]: Because we look after them there's a boy from
[Guest]: Our team in the last two weeks he's been
[Guest]: Ill and this
[Guest]: We welcomed him back with flowers and
[Guest]: Thank you for being alive like we've not
[Guest]: We were never going to question
[Guest]: And so many the same kid
[Guest]: Okay I was talking about
[Guest]: He was feeling lonely Durga Pooja is very
[Guest]: Important from Kolkata right so he was being lonely
[Guest]: He's like can I go home for a month
[Guest]: And work from home from there
[Guest]: Now he's very important because he's done
[Guest]: A lot of good work
[Guest]: In among the younger kids there is he's
[Guest]: A lot of responsibility that we put on him
[Guest]: We kind of spoke to each other and then we were
[Guest]: Like you know we will miss him on these things or whatever
[Guest]: It is but then we also realize that he's
[Guest]: Been such an important part of you are you
[Guest]: Know if he wants this one thing
[Guest]: Let's make it happen for him right
[Guest]: And then we said okay go ahead you know
[Guest]: And and he's just
[Guest]: I mean
[Guest]: What else are we here for you know if you're
[Guest]: Not here to like look after each other so
[Guest]: It's just
[Guest]: There's a lot of pretense
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: Beyond that lies love
[Guest]: So let's stop
[Amit Varma]: Pretending
[Amit Varma]: So much to learn from all of this and I love the
[Amit Varma]: Idea of the annual thank you letter you know
[Amit Varma]: When you mentioned that I said my first
[Amit Varma]: Thought was
[Amit Varma]: And my second thought was
[Amit Varma]: But
[Amit Varma]: So you know before
[Amit Varma]: We you know as we are on the
[Amit Varma]: Closing stretch and we've already spoken for
[Amit Varma]: More than six hours and I haven't asked you about you
[Unknown]: So I want to ask you about that
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the impetus behind starting
[Amit Varma]: You are especially since
[Amit Varma]: You know the kind of purpose driven content
[Amit Varma]: That you wanted to make
[Amit Varma]: You were already making it in a sense
[Amit Varma]: You know in any case that purpose driven
[Amit Varma]: Content is not preachy
[Amit Varma]: Content or anything it is just content
[Amit Varma]: Which is on those themes
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise as great story telling and
[Amit Varma]: So on and so forth and you were already
[Amit Varma]: Doing that at Yash Raj before this
[Amit Varma]: So you know why did you feel
[Amit Varma]: The need
[Amit Varma]: And I love the
[Amit Varma]: Decision to make it a for profit by the way
[Amit Varma]: Which you know because if you
[Amit Varma]: If one has a confidence that we are bringing
[Unknown]: Value to people then why not
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: The thoughts that went into your forming it
[Amit Varma]: And you know
[Amit Varma]: What do you see your mission as how is that evolved
[Guest]: What's the journey been like
[Guest]: So let me talk
[Guest]: Let me talk about a show that we made at Yash Raj
[Guest]: Called Man's World
[Guest]: It was a show about gender equality
[Guest]: But we had this outrageous idea
[Guest]: So Richard Curtis
[Guest]: The man behind
[Guest]: Love Actually, Four Weddings and a Funeral
[Guest]: Notting Hill
[Guest]: Runs this organization called
[Guest]: Project Everyone which is the media partner
[Guest]: Of the SDGs the Global Goals
[Guest]: The United Nations Media Partner
[Guest]: So his organization
[Guest]: Does all the content across the
[Guest]: World when it comes to SDGs
[Guest]: Or oversees it
[Guest]: Creatively fantastic organization
[Guest]: Fantastic people have worked with them
[Guest]: Multiple times now that was the first
[Guest]: We had got an email from Richard Curtis in our inbox
[Guest]: Saying like we want to make
[Guest]: Something in India around gender equality
[Guest]: You know it is SDG
[Guest]: And we would love
[Guest]: To work with Yash Raj Films and can we
[Guest]: Do a preachy
[Guest]: Sorry didn't say preachy can we do like a
[Guest]: Two minute video around
[Guest]: Gender equality and we came back and said
[Guest]: Like these two minute videos even
[Guest]: Let's get big stars we just said like they become very preachy
[Guest]: You can have the biggest stars
[Guest]: But they will never have the impact
[Guest]: You know if you want to especially you want to reach out
[Guest]: They wanted to reach out to young people
[Guest]: If you want to reach out to young people right now
[Guest]: The cool thing is you know
[Guest]: YouTube has become really big in India
[Guest]: And we didn't have a YouTube channel at that time
[Guest]: So we didn't have like or an active YouTube channel let's say
[Guest]: And we had this
[Guest]: Thought where we said that what if
[Guest]: We did
[Guest]: Permanent Roommates had just
[Guest]: Come out I was very excited about the potential
[Guest]: I had been brought on to make
[Guest]: Films at Y Films which is the youth wing of Yash Raj
[Guest]: Films but
[Guest]: I had been told that I am now
[Guest]: Also going to be leading the digital efforts
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: I was very excited about that so I said like as part of this
[Guest]: What if we kind of did a web show around this
[Guest]: And then my boss and I at that time
[Guest]: Kind of jammed and there was a story that had come
[Guest]: To us a series of sketches about gender
[Guest]: But like with the world
[Guest]: Inverted what if women were in the place
[Guest]: Of men and men were in the place of women
[Guest]: And then we said what if this wasn't a series of sketches
[Guest]: But like a fiction show about
[Guest]: A man who is misogynistic
[Guest]: And dislikes women and thinks that
[Guest]: Women have it too easy
[Guest]: Why do you have
[Guest]: Seats reserved for you in the buses
[Guest]: Why do you get menstrual leaves
[Guest]: Why is mother India why is there no father India
[Guest]: All kinds of stupid things right
[Guest]: And then he prays to the god and says
[Guest]: If
[Guest]: If the world flipped
[Guest]: And you know and men were
[Guest]: Women and women were women I wouldn't complain this much
[Guest]: And cut to the world flips and he wakes up
[Guest]: And realizes that now men are in the minority
[Guest]: So to speak
[Guest]: And are the oppressed community
[Guest]: Women are like now people in power
[Guest]: And the next three episodes
[Guest]: Four episodes are about what happens there
[Guest]: And every situation
[Guest]: That women are in we kind of put a man
[Guest]: In it and it's funny and it's also horrific
[Guest]: Because he is going out
[Guest]: In the night
[Guest]: Wearing a low cut v-neck
[Guest]: And there is a girl who is harassing him
[Guest]: And then when he goes to the
[Guest]: Police station the police
[Guest]: The woman on the police station says what were you wearing
[Guest]: So it's it's you know
[Guest]: You laugh at it because it's
[Guest]: A man and it's funny right
[Guest]: But then it's also horrifying because this is what happens with women in India
[Guest]: You know and she is
[Guest]: Watching like a video
[Guest]: You know which is so anyway
[Guest]: Not to go too deep into it a lot of interesting
[Guest]: People are associated with Ayushman Bhoomi, Richa Charda
[Guest]: Pratish Nandy so many people
[Guest]: When the show came out
[Guest]: They asked us this
[Guest]: True story so they had asked
[Guest]: What is the what do you think you will get
[Guest]: As views and this is now we are talking about
[Guest]: 2015 where like
[Guest]: What views and you know what not people used
[Guest]: To get views but it
[Guest]: Wasn't like numbers and targets and what
[Guest]: And we said we think we will get
[Guest]: Like over a period of five episodes
[Guest]: Six episodes and we've got all of these
[Guest]: Big people together and the show
[Guest]: Will hit a million
[Guest]: Hopefully
[Guest]: Including the trailer
[Guest]: Next morning I remember we came to
[Guest]: Office after the show had launched 24 hours later
[Guest]: And then all of us were staring at each other's faces
[Guest]: Because we had crossed
[Guest]: 1 million in 24
[Guest]: Hours without any
[Guest]: Paid marketing nothing nothing was done
[Guest]: Organically overnight
[Guest]: This show had gone viral
[Guest]: It was one of the first viral pieces of content
[Guest]: At that time and we were
[Guest]: How did this happen we had an
[Guest]: Email from them
[Guest]: Funny email that we had gotten
[Guest]: Saying you know you guys didn't have to
[Guest]: Like you know
[Guest]: You don't have to under tell us the numbers
[Guest]: You know like it's you can tell
[Guest]: Us like what you're you know let's be honest in our
[Guest]: Communication we were like dude we didn't
[Guest]: Expect this to happen you know
[Guest]: And it just and then you knew what happened
[Guest]: Because you see the comments the comments were
[Guest]: Insane I mean they were
[Guest]: Just so many
[Guest]: Girls saying thank you
[Guest]: For finally making
[Guest]: Something that you know
[Guest]: Gets our voice across and what we are
[Guest]: Going through and boys saying that man
[Guest]: And for whatever it's worth this is
[Guest]: Helping me understand my sister better this is helping
[Guest]: Me understand my mother better you know
[Guest]: Of course there was also misogyny
[Guest]: But not at that scale that is there right now
[Guest]: You know the internet as I said
[Guest]: Discussed empowered a certain kind of
[Guest]: Idea
[Guest]: And then what happened and this
[Guest]: Is where I think somewhere also I realized why
[Guest]: What I needed and to do
[Guest]: I'd been invited to
[Guest]: IP college
[Guest]: For women in
[Guest]: Delhi for a during a festival they had
[Guest]: And I had been
[Guest]: Invited for their media fest and you know
[Guest]: It was a big auditorium I was there Swara Bhaskar was there
[Guest]: You know few other people were there
[Guest]: And I had to give a
[Guest]: Keynote you know on media and what not I gave
[Guest]: A keynote pretty nice cool thing
[Guest]: And it was a big auditorium and then
[Guest]: There was like scattered it wasn't as
[Guest]: Full you know even with all the people there
[Guest]: Much bigger names than me it was not as
[Guest]: Full and what not I was like okay
[Guest]: Now I always do this whenever I go to colleges
[Guest]: Where I say that you know after the
[Guest]: Whatever prepared remarks or prepared stage
[Guest]: Thing I would love to have an offline
[Guest]: Meeting with like the people in the college just like
[Guest]: Chill with a few people you can get your
[Guest]: Same college committee I can you know
[Guest]: Just I just want to meet you and spend some
[Guest]: Time with like the folks behind the festival or whatever
[Guest]: So I just said that love to meet
[Guest]: Like some of the people who might want to spend
[Guest]: Like few minutes extra with me
[Guest]: It took me into a different room after that
[Guest]: And before I knew
[Guest]: It 500
[Guest]: Girls had come to that room
[Guest]: Because somebody had told them
[Guest]: That the person behind man's world was
[Guest]: Here they obviously don't know my name
[Guest]: And what not and
[Guest]: It was I didn't have place to we didn't have place to
[Guest]: I don't have that picture because like I feel
[Guest]: So bad I don't have the picture we didn't have place to
[Guest]: Sit we just it was not expected
[Guest]: It was supposed to be a small thing about 4-5
[Guest]: People 500 girls had turned
[Guest]: Up literally it was full full
[Guest]: Hard plate room and I'm standing there and I'm just like
[Guest]: What is happening and they're just like we everybody
[Guest]: Was just like we want to tell you what your show
[Guest]: Meant to us you know what it has helped
[Guest]: Us you know it we've helped it
[Guest]: Has helped us explain you know
[Guest]: Inequality to people that we know
[Guest]: This that and I
[Guest]: Was like man this is is this the power
[Guest]: Of like I mean I had this
[Guest]: Idea and hypothesis that you know this is
[Guest]: What can happen but this
[Guest]: Is insane
[Guest]: And I just realized that this is this
[Guest]: True potential you know we don't we can't just
[Guest]: Start this conversation on the internet
[Guest]: And then like stop it there we
[Guest]: Need to talk we need to do these things
[Guest]: Mindfully offline and
[Guest]: And I tried doing that at Yashraj you know
[Guest]: I tried I had a big vision for what
[Guest]: Twyfels could be all the shows we did
[Guest]: Were about socially conscious issues
[Guest]: Ladyzoom was about you know it was
[Guest]: A feminist show was India's first
[Guest]: Show genuinely India's first
[Guest]: Show featuring women in
[Guest]: The lead and it was English language
[Guest]: And we spoke about at that time about
[Guest]: You know abortions and about sexual
[Guest]: Harassment and about all the you know
[Guest]: Issues that now we are talking a lot more about
[Guest]: When it comes to women Shreya Dhanwantri
[Guest]: And Sabha Azad were in that show that
[Guest]: Became again a huge success to an
[Guest]: Extended Indie wire called it one of the best shows
[Guest]: In the world at that time organically
[Guest]: Picked it up we didn't have a say in that so
[Guest]: Six pack band we made which is India's first
[Guest]: Transgender pop group won the Khan
[Guest]: Grand Prix class lion
[Guest]: Bang Baja Baraat of course became very popular
[Guest]: One of these shows
[Guest]: I tried very
[Guest]: Hard within the wiref ecosystem
[Guest]: To go beyond what we are doing on the
[Guest]: Internet I was like the potential for this is
[Guest]: To have these conversations offline
[Guest]: To take these shows
[Guest]: Take them to colleges
[Guest]: Take them to because again I worked so
[Guest]: Closely with young people across you know I was like
[Guest]: Yeah man this they can genuinely have an
[Guest]: Impact I wanted to at some
[Guest]: Point turn what we were doing into like
[Guest]: A maybe e-magazine an offline
[Guest]: Magazine have people talking about
[Guest]: These issues in a larger way
[Guest]: How can we create impact was always the
[Guest]: Thing that you know became
[Guest]: Especially with young people between you but
[Guest]: Of course that's not the business model of Yashraj
[Guest]: Why would they spend this kind of I felt like
[Guest]: Wirefilms had that kind of it could have been
[Guest]: That but it was not the priority
[Guest]: And I understand that I don't begrudge that but I
[Guest]: And then when I got anxiety
[Guest]: You know we were also
[Guest]: We were at a place where unfortunately Yashraj
[Guest]: Was looting a lot of money in the film business
[Guest]: A lot of their films had flopped and suddenly you know
[Guest]: Wirefilms was not
[Guest]: Earlier
[Guest]: The very kind Aditya Chopra
[Guest]: Had pretty much given
[Guest]: Us full creative freedom to
[Guest]: Make whatever we wanted on the internet and was
[Guest]: So supportive and so sweet to us
[Guest]: You know he's I mean
[Guest]: Genuinely one of the nicest I can't
[Guest]: Believe that someone at his level of like fame
[Guest]: And like power is
[Guest]: So sweet and graceful to
[Guest]: Just young people in his
[Guest]: Organization he's so sweet
[Guest]: To you know
[Guest]: Who had been always so supportive kind of
[Guest]: Just obviously was much busier
[Guest]: Figuring larger work
[Guest]: At Wiref and and Wirefilms
[Guest]: Was not the priority at that time and you know
[Guest]: And I was just
[Guest]: Impatient because I realized that
[Guest]: There is something here but we can we had
[Guest]: Made we had hit
[Guest]: Two two and a half million subscribers again in
[Guest]: 2015-16
[Guest]: Everything we were doing it was
[Guest]: Like the most successful
[Guest]: Period of my life and career where
[Guest]: Anything we were doing was turning into gold
[Guest]: And I just
[Guest]: Felt like you know and then I
[Guest]: Got anxiety which you know
[Guest]: Because if I mean
[Guest]: And when I took that sabbatical
[Guest]: And then I went again to these colleges
[Guest]: In different parts of India
[Guest]: Before even you I kind of went outside
[Guest]: And met a lot of young people in different colleges
[Guest]: In India I just knew that that's
[Guest]: That's where the kindness project had happened that
[Guest]: Had become a transformative experience for me
[Guest]: I knew the power of offline communities
[Guest]: And I wanted to say like there needs to
[Guest]: Be we can't every
[Guest]: Young platform in our country is a one way communication
[Guest]: It's like we are putting online things
[Guest]: And this is to people come
[Guest]: And comment on it but we don't interact with them
[Guest]: We needed to have a platform that actually
[Guest]: Listens to young people we needed to have
[Guest]: Two way communication that here's what we are
[Guest]: Doing now we're going to go offline and talk about it
[Guest]: And now we're going to have conversations about it
[Guest]: You know and and that's the
[Guest]: That's what I wanted to do when I started
[Guest]: You know and again this was
[Guest]: All an idea so just to also tell
[Guest]: You the small back story of
[Guest]: I had a friend called Amritpal Bindra
[Guest]: Who was also the producer of
[Guest]: Bang Baja Baraat and along
[Guest]: You know I mean his production had made it
[Guest]: And Pappu and Papa
[Guest]: And we had become really thick because of the shows
[Guest]: That we did together
[Guest]: Anand Tiwari who is the director of
[Guest]: You know Bang Baja Baraat again all three of us had become very close
[Guest]: And once I was
[Guest]: Done with you know when I was
[Guest]: This is a true story like
[Guest]: When I told my
[Guest]: Therapist said that you're not emotional
[Guest]: At the end of it she also said that
[Guest]: You know what I'm giving you an exercise
[Guest]: You have to find a male friend of yours
[Guest]: And you have to go and tell that person
[Guest]: You know what you're going through you know
[Guest]: And I just chose Amrit Bindra
[Guest]: To be that person and that night
[Guest]: I went to his I said can I come over he said yeah
[Guest]: Please come I went to his home and
[Guest]: For about
[Guest]: Much longer than I think the serial
[Guest]: Unseen podcast I just started
[Guest]: He's like how are you feeling I was like I just want to explain
[Guest]: How I'm feeling and then for
[Guest]: 7-8 hours I was just talking
[Guest]: About like you know
[Guest]: What I'm going through how anxious I am
[Guest]: And how I want to do all of these things
[Guest]: For young people and all these ideas that I had
[Guest]: But I was like how can I do it I don't think
[Guest]: They get the potential I was really frustrated I was like
[Guest]: I want to do more things etc so
[Guest]: Amrit very patiently sweetly listened to me that night
[Guest]: And you know just was a good friend
[Guest]: To me he had other plans he cancelled them all so just come
[Guest]: And you know and the next morning he
[Guest]: Said okay let me think over what you've said and I want
[Guest]: To kind of come to you with a solution
[Guest]: So I said I don't know what solution
[Guest]: He will have but 2 days later he called me and said
[Guest]: You know I've been thinking about it what if whatever
[Guest]: You said is a company
[Guest]: And I said that I don't know
[Guest]: What how to do a company I'm middle class
[Guest]: I don't know everything I'm too scared to
[Guest]: You know do something like that he said
[Guest]: He's like you don't worry
[Guest]: We will raise the money what needed to
[Guest]: Actually started and you just
[Guest]: Run it you know you are
[Guest]: All the things that you're saying that
[Guest]: Should be the thing that you know
[Guest]: Make it a company
[Guest]: Make it a movement do what you can with it
[Guest]: And I was so scared of it and
[Guest]: This is before the sabbatical and everything
[Guest]: And then I went I quit I went on sabbatical and I
[Guest]: Think in the 2 months or 3 months I realized
[Guest]: That whatever options
[Guest]: I had in front of me the only
[Guest]: Option that seemed like
[Guest]: You know something which
[Guest]: So for me Yuva
[Guest]: I decided to start Yuva when
[Guest]: In my head I made peace with the fact that
[Guest]: Even if it fails it will be worth it
[Guest]: It was not because I thought that it would
[Guest]: Succeed but because I thought that if it fails
[Guest]: It will still be worth it
[Guest]: And yeah I came back and I
[Guest]: Said and I didn't we didn't have a name at that time
[Guest]: So I came back and met him and I said
[Guest]: I have a name and he said what is the name I said Yuva
[Guest]: And they loved the name and said let's do it
[Guest]: And I had this vision that I made like this is what this
[Guest]: For the next 10 years this is what
[Guest]: Yuva will do and it's so
[Guest]: It's so I'm so grateful that you know
[Guest]: All the like out of all the things that we're doing most of
[Guest]: Those things you know at this in 4 years
[Guest]: And and the idea for Yuva
[Guest]: Was as I said a platform that listens
[Guest]: But just
[Guest]: As I said we wanted to be the intersection of
[Guest]: What is important what is interesting so what Yuva
[Guest]: Really does now and the multiple
[Guest]: Things that we do and again I'm very
[Guest]: Proud of my team to be able to you know
[Guest]: Do all of these things at one
[Guest]: End we are doing research you know so we
[Guest]: Are talking to young people listening
[Guest]: To them we're doing listening sessions
[Guest]: You know with young people across the country
[Guest]: And working with the likes
[Guest]: Of again from an Amazon and Netflix
[Guest]: Where for example they have a show about
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: As an example Majama
[Guest]: Which was a show which a movie about
[Guest]: You know the LGBT community
[Guest]: They got they asked
[Guest]: Us to come on board to do a research
[Guest]: With young people from the
[Guest]: Queer community to you know
[Guest]: Take them through the script and take them through the idea
[Guest]: And ask them is this does this work
[Guest]: Are we being responsible and
[Guest]: Representative for the community
[Guest]: And we worked with you know
[Guest]: Queer rights NGO
[Guest]: And and couple of other NGOs we kind of
[Guest]: Put on took on board
[Guest]: You know with the young bunch of young people over there we did
[Guest]: A bunch of research and gave back and said here's what
[Guest]: You know people young people think
[Guest]: About this and they made those changes so at
[Guest]: One end we are working with like
[Guest]: Film production houses and studios like
[Guest]: Junglee, Excel
[Guest]: Phone booth we have done research on
[Guest]: Badhai Do we had done research on
[Guest]: Many more shows
[Guest]: That crash course many more shows
[Guest]: That are coming and movies that are coming that we are working on
[Guest]: On the other hand we are working with
[Guest]: Something I mean like a UNICEF Gujarat
[Guest]: To to and we put
[Guest]: Together this year a youth manifesto
[Guest]: For the government of Gujarat on what should
[Guest]: Be the youth policy for Gujarat
[Guest]: So UNICEF India
[Guest]: Brought us on board they were they
[Guest]: Obviously were supposed to present a
[Guest]: Youth policy for the government
[Guest]: They brought us on board to do the research among young people
[Guest]: In India in Gujarat and
[Guest]: It was specifically on mental health
[Guest]: You know and we worked
[Guest]: With different parts
[Guest]: Of different young people in across the
[Guest]: Across Gujarat and put it all together
[Guest]: And we have the I should have
[Guest]: Brought it in fact and given it to you
[Guest]: It's like a booklet now that we kind of
[Guest]: But it's such so insightful so
[Guest]: Incredible you know how honest these young people
[Guest]: Are and then we presented it to the
[Guest]: Government and you know now they have to figure out
[Guest]: What all they want to incorporate from it that's up to
[Guest]: Them but that's the level
[Guest]: Of research we're doing so lots we're
[Guest]: Working with for profits non-profits but
[Guest]: Ultimately again about impact on the
[Guest]: Other hand we have a campaigns
[Guest]: Team in campaigns
[Guest]: Again we're working with some of India's biggest
[Guest]: Non-profits and also some of India's
[Guest]: For profits
[Guest]: Policy teams so as
[Guest]: An example in the branded space we're working
[Guest]: With tender India on consent
[Guest]: We have created a website with tender India
[Guest]: Called letstalkconsent.com
[Guest]: Which is a one-stop resource for young people to
[Guest]: Go and you know learn about consent so we
[Guest]: Have authored and put together the whole website
[Guest]: Now what we are doing is we are going
[Guest]: We have just finished we did this weekend
[Guest]: Last weekend we did our first
[Guest]: Campus activation where we spoke
[Guest]: About consent and discussed consent
[Guest]: In a college VGTI in Bombay
[Guest]: And now over the next few months we are going
[Guest]: Across the country to have conversations
[Guest]: About consent with young people in different colleges
[Guest]: Boys girls anybody from any
[Guest]: Gender to come in and have
[Guest]: Open and honest communication about
[Guest]: Why is it so difficult for
[Guest]: So many of us to recognize what
[Guest]: Consent is you know that's
[Guest]: At a you know level of you know
[Guest]: With another as another example
[Guest]: Of campaigns we are working with
[Guest]: Dasara and Bill and Melinda Gates foundation
[Guest]: Over the next two years to
[Guest]: Put together a community
[Guest]: Of 1 million young people online
[Guest]: Who will talk about
[Guest]: And care about SRH
[Guest]: In accessible and talk about
[Guest]: In an accessible ways how can we make
[Guest]: Sexual and reproductive health the conversation
[Guest]: Around that accessible for young
[Guest]: People and over the next two years
[Guest]: We have put together platforms called
[Guest]: Youth K Bol across Josh app twitter
[Guest]: Instagram that we are going to be populating
[Guest]: And going to be making content around for
[Guest]: Two years we are doing offline events will be doing
[Guest]: Podcasts but for two years the
[Guest]: Ideas at the end of these two years we should have a
[Guest]: Community of young people
[Guest]: That is constantly talking
[Guest]: About SRH
[Guest]: You know talking about it in meaningful ways and then
[Guest]: Of course being champions where they will talk about it offline
[Guest]: In their own families and lives etc right
[Guest]: So that's campaigns as a separate
[Guest]: Team that is working again offline
[Guest]: Then you have a third team which is the events team
[Guest]: We are now as an
[Guest]: Example you know this year's
[Guest]: Spotify has something called IRL
[Guest]: And creators day that
[Guest]: We are programming for them you know
[Guest]: And they wanted to reach out to
[Guest]: Young people Gen Z so they have come to us and say
[Guest]: Can you please program it for us
[Guest]: So we programmed it on the other hand you have
[Guest]: As an example
[Guest]: We did an
[Guest]: Event with YouTube India
[Guest]: During pride month where we did
[Guest]: Where we had something called
[Guest]: The pride class of 2022
[Guest]: Where we got 10 queer creators
[Guest]: From different parts of India together to have a graduation
[Guest]: Ceremony this year saying that
[Guest]: Your voices matter and you know
[Guest]: This year we want to kind of bring you together
[Guest]: As the class of 2022 for
[Guest]: Being the most outspoken about queer
[Guest]: Issues and
[Guest]: Yeah and we had like Parmesh Shahani
[Guest]: And Sushant Divgikar coming and giving
[Guest]: Them talks and YouTube coming and
[Guest]: Kind of teaching them how can they make
[Guest]: Creator content better
[Guest]: And just making a day out of it and having
[Guest]: A full graduation ceremony where they had a class photo
[Guest]: And they had you know
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: The whole jingbang that comes with it
[Guest]: So that's the third
[Guest]: Thing, the fourth is
[Guest]: Content that we are making, in content
[Guest]: We are doing content on Instagram, YouTube etc
[Guest]: But we are also doing branded
[Guest]: Content again on issues
[Guest]: That matter you know
[Guest]: But in interesting ways, how do we make all of these things
[Guest]: Accessible, we are also doing
[Guest]: Short films, we did two short films this year with
[Guest]: MiniDV, one was called Grey with Shreya Dhanwant
[Guest]: Jandiya Mirza, one was called Tasali Se with
[Guest]: Nakul Mehta and Naveen Kasturia
[Guest]: Now we are making a series for
[Guest]: I can't say the platform but we are making a series for a
[Guest]: Platform that's going to come out next year
[Guest]: There is also a movie in the pipeline
[Guest]: We have done a podcast with Spotify called
[Guest]: Tear Teenage Me which has become one of their
[Guest]: Most heard podcast
[Guest]: We have been renewed for two more seasons
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: Yeah that's content
[Guest]: And then yeah I think we have covered
[Guest]: It all and then yeah sorry finally there is community
[Guest]: And college activations where we go to colleges
[Guest]: We have a network in about 500
[Guest]: Colleges of India
[Guest]: And we work with
[Guest]: Different again for-profits
[Guest]: Non-profits to do college activations
[Guest]: Now whether the roadshow is also part of that
[Guest]: At the same time
[Guest]: As an example we did
[Guest]: During
[Guest]: The pandemic we did with
[Guest]: UNICEF again a creator intervention
[Guest]: It was called the content
[Guest]: Creator intervention where
[Guest]: We caught
[Guest]: 110
[Guest]: Micro content creators in
[Guest]: Colleges across the country
[Guest]: Would like 10,000 you know
[Guest]: You know or less
[Guest]: Or more and
[Guest]: With them we created
[Guest]: 1650 pieces of content
[Guest]: Over 6 months around misinformation
[Guest]: Around vaccines because
[Guest]: We needed to in there so in
[Guest]: Places like Ladakh in places like
[Guest]: Shillong in places like
[Guest]: Tier 2 tier 2 plus
[Guest]: Tier 2 tier you know to minus
[Guest]: All of these cities where we could have
[Guest]: Conversations but with young people talking
[Guest]: So we help them create this content
[Guest]: It got us like a 40 million reach
[Guest]: Over 6 months
[Guest]: Across multiple platforms and that's the
[Guest]: Yeah that's
[Guest]: So offline also we do a lot of work
[Guest]: Offline we are doing these open mics and these safe
[Guest]: Spaces online there's
[Guest]: A lot so you know touch wood the team
[Guest]: Has really now I mean they've worked
[Guest]: So hard on all of this such a
[Guest]: So grateful to have such an incredible
[Guest]: Team now and
[Guest]: Yeah we are just getting started I think
[Amit Varma]: Your team is working hard
[Unknown]: Boss but you are doing a podcast
[Unknown]: With Wednesday off
[Unknown]: I'm
[Unknown]: I'm full of admiration
[Amit Varma]: I mean everything you are doing
[Amit Varma]: Just sounds like absolutely
[Amit Varma]: Amazing work so to get back to the
[Amit Varma]: Personal you know
[Amit Varma]: Beyond you are beyond all of this
[Amit Varma]: That you are doing what are the
[Amit Varma]: Things that you when you wake up in the morning
[Amit Varma]: That you look forward to doing like you want
[Amit Varma]: To make more films you want to tell more stories
[Guest]: What do you want to do so at this point
[Guest]: I mean I'll be honest I'm
[Guest]: You know I'm focusing a little bit on
[Guest]: Your originals which is
[Guest]: I mean
[Guest]: The aim for you was always to have
[Guest]: You know this entire
[Guest]: 360
[Guest]: You know way of reaching out to
[Guest]: Young people we have now done
[Guest]: We have now
[Guest]: Gotten into the offline and we have tried to
[Guest]: I think we are doing pretty well in that
[Guest]: We are on the internet we have a great
[Guest]: Reach now which is another important aspect of
[Guest]: What you are doing but the highest
[Guest]: And the most reach you will always
[Guest]: Get through the longest form
[Guest]: Of and you know the most watched pieces
[Guest]: Of content which is
[Guest]: Films and shows and what not
[Guest]: And podcast and what not and that's really going
[Guest]: To be my focus right now that's also my passion
[Guest]: That's also my skill set it's
[Guest]: It's what I love most in the world
[Guest]: To be a producer to be able to be a writer
[Guest]: To be able to tell stories I'm very
[Guest]: Fortunate that I'm in the series
[Guest]: That's coming next year I'm sure running that I'm producing
[Guest]: That the film that we'll be making
[Guest]: I've written that you know those
[Guest]: Are things that I mean
[Guest]: There's a lot of stories in me
[Guest]: That I just want to put out into the world right now and I
[Guest]: Feel like my aim
[Guest]: And I
[Guest]: Think I told you this during lunch is like
[Guest]: I'm
[Guest]: Really
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: My
[Guest]: I don't know obsession
[Guest]: Is
[Guest]: How do we capture
[Guest]: The stories of
[Guest]: Our generation in a
[Guest]: Way that 20 30 40
[Guest]: Years down the line when we look back
[Guest]: People look at
[Guest]: My filmography and
[Guest]: The work that you were has done
[Guest]: As like a
[Guest]: Piece in time captured
[Guest]: You know this is what young people
[Guest]: What about at this time
[Guest]: You know and
[Guest]: If you want to have that understanding well
[Guest]: You are the place and maybe Nikhil is the person
[Guest]: You know and it's really
[Guest]: Important for me because
[Guest]: I think that's what films did
[Guest]: For me growing up that's what stories
[Guest]: Did for me growing up I think they
[Guest]: Helped me find my place in the world
[Guest]: And I want to
[Guest]: In whatever the most
[Guest]: Humble way you know be
[Guest]: A catalyst for
[Guest]: You know to kind of
[Guest]: Capture that for this generation
[Guest]: You know by working with them
[Guest]: By the way like so so as an example
[Guest]: Grey was directed by someone
[Guest]: I dearly love and fond of
[Guest]: You know 27 year old young
[Guest]: Filmmaker called Sakshi Gurnani
[Guest]: Who worked with me at Yashraj she was my
[Guest]: Student then she was my
[Guest]: Assistant producer at YRF the first
[Guest]: Employee that I've hired over there and now
[Guest]: She's you know the first
[Guest]: My first short film that I
[Guest]: Made she was the director on that I'm
[Guest]: Filming with her so so yeah I'm
[Guest]: Always it's always going to be about
[Guest]: Even the work that we're doing it's never going
[Guest]: To be just me it's always going to be one young person
[Guest]: At least more young people associated with that work
[Guest]: And and using
[Guest]: Their help and working with them
[Guest]: With my experience and their understanding
[Guest]: And insight of you know of
[Guest]: Being part of the generation how can we capture these
[Guest]: Stories in a way that
[Guest]: As I said again I'm repeating this
[Guest]: Sounding like a broken record but like
[Guest]: Make someone somewhere feel less alone
[Amit Varma]: I mean you can't give a physical
[Amit Varma]: Hug to everybody but you know
[Amit Varma]: Virtually if you just fulfill that same
[Amit Varma]: Function it kind of
[Amit Varma]: Means a lot so I'll end the show by
[Amit Varma]: Asking you to recommend
[Amit Varma]: For me and my listeners books
[Amit Varma]: Films music that you absolutely love and
[Guest]: Would want everyone to this is something
[Guest]: That I've also thought about a lot because I was like
[Guest]: I don't know what all I can say
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: In the book section there
[Guest]: Is a book I'm sure you must have read
[Guest]: Or if you haven't I'm going to gift it to you
[Guest]: It's called Humankind
[Guest]: By Rutger Bregman have you read it?
[Amit Varma]: I just bought it on Kindle
[Amit Varma]: After I saw your video on Chalchitra
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: It is the most hopeful
[Guest]: Book that I have read
[Guest]: In my life
[Guest]: It has now become like
[Guest]: I mean I want to meet Rutger Bregman
[Guest]: And I want to like thank him
[Guest]: I want to shake his hand although I've had
[Guest]: Very weird experience with
[Guest]: People I look up to so
[Guest]: I hope this is a positive experience
[Guest]: But I really want to tell him that
[Guest]: I'm a huge fan and
[Guest]: Fortunately I've been able to do that with a lot of people
[Guest]: I admire and
[Guest]: His book is essentially
[Guest]: Optimism about
[Guest]: The world
[Guest]: From a lens of kindness saying that you know we've
[Guest]: Historically kind of told
[Guest]: The narrative that we have built is
[Guest]: That the world is unkind
[Guest]: But actually
[Guest]: You know I will
[Guest]: Prove to you and he's an economist by the way
[Guest]: So he's a very well known
[Guest]: Economist who's also gone
[Guest]: Viral for like being at
[Guest]: Davos and like
[Guest]: Shutting down billionaires so he's
[Guest]: Really cool person
[Guest]: Not very old again I think
[Guest]: Late 30s if I'm not wrong
[Guest]: And he's yeah his book
[Guest]: Is basically he's just trying to prove
[Guest]: Through a series of you know
[Guest]: Real world incidents that we all
[Guest]: Know of and then shining a different light
[Guest]: At them and saying I'll tell you why this was
[Guest]: More kindness than unkindness
[Guest]: As an example he's spoken about the Stanford prison
[Guest]: Experiment which all of us know as one of the
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Like a really terrible
[Guest]: Psychological
[Guest]: You know event that has happened
[Guest]: An experiment that has happened and he's
[Guest]: Talked about how like there was
[Guest]: Some kindness going on there which I mean
[Guest]: Incredible I can't even explain
[Amit Varma]: So so great such a great book
[Amit Varma]: Didn't they find out that that was shady and it was
[Guest]: Partly faked I think something came
[Guest]: It talks about that also so there is a
[Guest]: There is a what the
[Guest]: Real experiment actually you know what it
[Guest]: There is I mean I can't without
[Amit Varma]: Giving it away we'll all read the book
[Guest]: Superb absolutely incredible book
[Guest]: That has I think had the
[Guest]: Biggest impact on my life I think of recent
[Guest]: Times there is also a book that I've just
[Guest]: Finished reading and I mean just finish
[Guest]: Finishing reading which I've just now incredibly
[Guest]: Like and I'm gonna just
[Guest]: Recommend recent books because I feel like
[Guest]: That's the easiest thing to do
[Guest]: And you know that doesn't otherwise I get
[Guest]: Too divided and I start getting anxious
[Guest]: Virtual can I name but
[Guest]: I'm just reading this book I've
[Guest]: Mentioned before Chaos Machine
[Guest]: By Max Fischer which is
[Guest]: I think essential reading for
[Guest]: Everybody about
[Guest]: The way the internet
[Guest]: And social media has is ruining
[Guest]: Society and you know and
[Guest]: Shoving us into
[Guest]: Division and polarization
[Guest]: Incredible book incredibly
[Guest]: Researched
[Guest]: Absolutely incredible
[Guest]: I mean you've
[Guest]: You've already spoken about Shayana's but I just
[Guest]: Her book was
[Guest]: So I mean again gender
[Guest]: And Shahrukh Khan
[Guest]: Such a beautiful beautiful
[Guest]: Book that I've read
[Guest]: Another book in the not in the
[Guest]: Same lines but called Invisible Women
[Guest]: I'm sure it's been recommended earlier
[Guest]: As well and
[Guest]: Opened my mind
[Guest]: And how you know from a lens
[Guest]: Of the fact that every space that
[Guest]: We occupy has
[Guest]: Been created of and for
[Guest]: And by men and
[Guest]: Just things that I never thought
[Guest]: Even as someone who looks at gender
[Guest]: Very always sees gender in different
[Guest]: Places I never thought of
[Guest]: Things like how when
[Guest]: In a
[Guest]: In a club the
[Guest]: Sizes given to the male and female
[Guest]: Toilets are the same
[Guest]: I mean the question was why are there more
[Guest]: Women have longer lines in clubs
[Guest]: Than men do why do so many women
[Guest]: Want to pee and men don't want to pee
[Guest]: But men because we have urinals there can be
[Guest]: Five urinals at a club but for the
[Guest]: Same type in the same
[Guest]: Area which is also given
[Guest]: By men designed by
[Guest]: Men women will have only three
[Guest]: Toilets sit down
[Guest]: Toilets and because of that
[Guest]: The lines are longer
[Guest]: And you just
[Guest]: Don't even think of architecture
[Guest]: In a capacity of gender
[Guest]: And there's just so much
[Guest]: I mean it's an incredible book I read
[Guest]: It really opened my mind
[Guest]: I'll also
[Guest]: Name a memoir
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Will Smith's book
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: It is so sensitively written
[Guest]: And it is also about
[Guest]: Gender the entire book is about like
[Guest]: You know what you've seen
[Guest]: Will Smith
[Guest]: Literally his book starts with assault
[Guest]: It starts with how
[Guest]: First line of the book is how his father
[Guest]: Hit his mother
[Guest]: And how that has
[Guest]: Impacted him all his life this book is about violence
[Guest]: And you know
[Guest]: And trying to deal with that violence
[Guest]: It's so introspective so
[Guest]: Personal so well written
[Guest]: I'm shocked that a celebrity at his level
[Guest]: Has gone so deep
[Guest]: And been so transparent
[Guest]: About
[Guest]: Again his identity
[Guest]: From the lens of gender
[Guest]: So and it'll help you understand
[Guest]: What has happened in the Oscar stage
[Guest]: So I mean that's
[Guest]: Clickbaity reason why you should read it but otherwise
[Guest]: It's just an absolutely great book
[Guest]: Yeah okay so
[Guest]: The last book I would recommend again
[Guest]: You know is a book
[Guest]: By Ayaad Akhtar called
[Guest]: Leggies or elegies
[Guest]: I don't know how to pronounce it
[Guest]: And it is it's a book
[Guest]: About the Muslim identity
[Guest]: It's written
[Guest]: Almost as a fictionalized
[Guest]: He's written a fictionalized version of his own life
[Guest]: You know and what the Trump
[Guest]: You know being a Muslim in America
[Guest]: Pre and post Trump and it is
[Guest]: Just brilliant
[Guest]: I mean it is so well written
[Guest]: Just
[Guest]: I don't even know what is the way to describe
[Guest]: Well this man writes just
[Guest]: Incredible writing
[Guest]: So thoughtful so nuanced
[Guest]: So smart
[Guest]: I've been I've become
[Guest]: Such a huge fan I'm waiting for his
[Guest]: Next book like
[Guest]: I'll also give like a
[Guest]: Really fun suggestion
[Guest]: You know because I
[Guest]: Read a lot of film books and just
[Guest]: Really fun to read
[Guest]: You know again recent book
[Guest]: Seth Rogen's book
[Guest]: And it's both available
[Guest]: I mean if you have to listen to an audio book
[Guest]: Hear that
[Guest]: He's just got bunch of insane
[Guest]: Stories from Seth Rogen's life and this
[Guest]: So funny it's so funny you laugh out loud
[Guest]: So often and he's got
[Guest]: These bizarre stories about you know
[Guest]: Other celebrities like Nicolas Cage
[Guest]: And and and of course
[Guest]: Growing his Jew identity and you know
[Guest]: What that meant growing up
[Guest]: Fabulous really really
[Guest]: Funny book I'm still
[Guest]: Trying you know I feel like I
[Guest]: Don't read enough books from
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Indian authors and I kind of actually
[Guest]: Have started
[Guest]: You know some some of your
[Guest]: Shows and showed I mean recommendations
[Guest]: I try to go try to
[Guest]: Buy those books but
[Guest]: Still need to do a lot more but yeah
[Guest]: These are my larger recommendations
[Guest]: Music I am you know I'm not
[Guest]: A very big music fan or
[Guest]: Music buff so I mean not in the sense
[Guest]: Of I don't
[Guest]: Have a diverse enough playlist
[Guest]: You know or I have not
[Guest]: Explored as much music as I
[Guest]: Think anybody else though one of
[Guest]: My obsessions again as
[Guest]: If I use that word again over the last
[Guest]: Few two three years has been this
[Guest]: Singer called Shamoon Ismail
[Guest]: Who is a Pakistani
[Guest]: Singer and sings in Punjabi
[Guest]: And and makes jazz
[Guest]: And blues and hip-hop
[Guest]: And if you haven't heard him
[Guest]: I have just changed your life right now
[Guest]: Because he is incredible
[Guest]: What a voice and what
[Guest]: A what a singer
[Guest]: In the pandemic somehow just I don't know
[Guest]: Got so much comfort
[Guest]: Listening to his songs I've listened I mean my Spotify
[Guest]: Rapped over the last three years has been
[Guest]: Top is just Shamoon Ismail
[Guest]: The other my comfort
[Guest]: My other comfort
[Guest]: Band is
[Guest]: Is Vampire Weekend
[Guest]: I'm I'm
[Guest]: Again I don't know
[Guest]: I feel like
[Guest]: I don't know this
[Guest]: Is something so
[Guest]: The millennial experience
[Guest]: Of being lost
[Guest]: And and in this
[Guest]: Huge world you know
[Guest]: And trying to find your place is just
[Guest]: Vampire Weekend does such an incredible
[Guest]: Job of of
[Guest]: Explaining that otherwise
[Guest]: You know I am I really love like
[Guest]: I mean I listen to Bollywood music a lot
[Guest]: And you know I mean Amit Trivedi
[Guest]: Has been someone I've just always really really
[Guest]: Looked up to you know
[Guest]: One of my all time favorite albums
[Guest]: But I also really love because of my
[Guest]: Father and that's one of the
[Guest]: Things that I really am grateful to him for
[Guest]: I've listened to a lot of Dev Anand songs
[Guest]: So I constantly keep one of my
[Guest]: Favorite songs of all time is
[Guest]: Hum hai rai pyaar ke hum se kuch na boliye
[Guest]: Jo bhi pyaar
[Guest]: Se mila hum usi ki holiye and I think that's just
[Amit Varma]: A beautiful what a
[Guest]: Philosophy you know
[Guest]: Jo bhi pyaar se mila hum usi ki holiye
[Guest]: There's just dhoop thi
[Guest]: Miliye hume dhoop me liya hai dum
[Guest]: Chandni miliye toh hum chandni me soliye
[Guest]: Kya lyrics aur music the uss time ke bhai
[Guest]: Incredible yaar incredible so it's my
[Guest]: Guru it's my when I feel a little sad
[Guest]: Or lost I go back to this song I just feel like
[Guest]: One of the most beautiful beautiful songs
[Guest]: Ever made so I really love
[Guest]: Because my dad Dev Anand songs because he was
[Guest]: Obsessed with Dev Anand and and
[Guest]: Because of him I kind of became one of my big
[Guest]: Regrets is like when I was in HD
[Guest]: I once got a chance to interview
[Guest]: Dev Anand but it was with somebody else
[Guest]: And I was just like
[Guest]: I want to do it alone because I know
[Guest]: How much it would mean to my dad
[Guest]: For me to spend time with Dev Anand
[Guest]: And I just didn't go
[Guest]: And I was just like nahi tu jaa main alag se karunga
[Guest]: Interview and then he passed away
[Guest]: And you know in my head it was like always this
[Guest]: Evergreen I was like how he can't
[Guest]: Die he will always live
[Guest]: Stupid notion
[Guest]: I regret that you know I couldn't do that for my dad
[Guest]: I would have you know
[Guest]: Would have really loved to do it for him
[Guest]: You know but yeah
[Guest]: Dev Anand and his songs were just classics
[Guest]: Movies I don't even just
[Guest]: All the worst movies
[Guest]: I don't even know what to
[Amit Varma]: It's just the toughest thing
[Amit Varma]: You have a really nice video and Chalchitra talks about a bunch of films
[Guest]: You really like so I will link that
[Guest]: But apart from that if there's
[Guest]: Yeah you know I mean I'm a eternal
[Guest]: Believer
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: Lover of rom-coms
[Guest]: And romance that's been
[Guest]: Always my
[Guest]: I don't know happy place
[Guest]: Just watching a film about people in love
[Guest]: Is just so nice
[Guest]: I'm a
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: Before series is something
[Guest]: That has just meant so much to me
[Guest]: And I got to speak to Richard Link later and I got to
[Guest]: I got an autographed poster from him
[Guest]: So it's been like I think
[Guest]: My name drop moment
[Guest]: I got to have a 45 minute
[Guest]: Interview on love with Richard
[Guest]: Link later it's out it's on open magazine
[Guest]: It's just the
[Guest]: Kindest person to talk to so sweet
[Guest]: So sweet and yeah
[Guest]: I just what the before series
[Guest]: Has done was always something for me as like
[Guest]: He's managed to capture
[Guest]: Love without
[Guest]: The beat
[Guest]: Structure of
[Guest]: Which we kind of
[Guest]: Structure in that sense all the
[Guest]: Traditional
[Guest]: Structures of what romances should be
[Guest]: What an incredible and I think
[Guest]: There's something about like
[Guest]: For me it's just something so
[Guest]: Amazing to
[Guest]: See in a
[Guest]: In a day or in a moment
[Guest]: You know how love
[Guest]: Grows you know there's obviously
[Guest]: Love that happens over years and
[Guest]: Decades and then I just feel like there's also something
[Guest]: Special about connection that
[Guest]: Happens with each other so I just love
[Guest]: That I love the series I keep going back
[Guest]: To it
[Guest]: You know I should have really like
[Guest]: Brought my movie recommendation
[Guest]: I was actually more stuck upon
[Guest]: Books and then I forgot about the movies
[Guest]: To think of
[Guest]: I mean Oye Lucky Lucky way as I've said
[Guest]: Already is one of my favorite films of all time
[Guest]: Again it's on I feel like such a
[Guest]: Great conversation about identity
[Guest]: And loneliness you know in the
[Guest]: In the world we live in I feel like
[Guest]: The misfit
[Guest]: That Abidul's character was
[Guest]: I just kind of so related to that I felt
[Guest]: Like one of the greatest films ever made
[Guest]: In India just
[Guest]: Something that still
[Guest]: Scenes from that movie still haunt
[Guest]: Me Super Chor from that film
[Guest]: From that film is one of my favorite
[Guest]: Songs of all time I keep going back to it
[Guest]: Recently
[Guest]: So I watch a lot of TV shows
[Guest]: I'll recommend like you know
[Guest]: Succession is one of my favorite series
[Guest]: Schitt's Creek is an
[Guest]: Absolutely incredible series that everyone should watch
[Guest]: Ted Lasso, Masculinity
[Guest]: Kindness all the things that
[Guest]: Mental health all the things I care about it's like
[Guest]: You know Jason Sudeikis
[Guest]: And all his partners in the
[Guest]: Writing team just decided like
[Guest]: You know I will make a show
[Guest]: Perfect for Nikhil Taneja and that is that show
[Guest]: You mentioned Bojack Horseman also
[Guest]: Bojack Horseman is one of my
[Guest]: I think again if
[Guest]: What a
[Guest]: Incredible so there's a book actually
[Guest]: By the
[Guest]: By Raphael
[Guest]: Bob I forget
[Guest]: His last name but the guy who's created
[Guest]: Bojack Horseman and it's
[Guest]: It's an anthology book
[Guest]: And it's really just it's
[Guest]: Everything it's just the weirdest book
[Guest]: But somehow it is going to make you
[Guest]: So happy to read so unique
[Guest]: So fresh and just can it
[Guest]: Can't be a mind other than
[Guest]: You know Bojack Horseman that can come up with
[Guest]: Bojack Horseman is one of my favorites
[Guest]: I just recently this year saw Lord of the Rings
[Guest]: And I'm just Lord of the Rings has been my
[Guest]: Rings of Power Lord of the Rings has been
[Guest]: Again my favorite
[Guest]: Movie series ever
[Guest]: And I've seen it I think about
[Guest]: 20-30 times I own like
[Guest]: Extended edition of
[Guest]: Of it I own the special edition of
[Guest]: It I own the VCDs the DVDs the
[Guest]: Even like you know I mean
[Guest]: Not the yeah
[Guest]: I own it almost every different format
[Guest]: Obsessed with the fact
[Guest]: That you know there is there is somebody made
[Guest]: A three part series about
[Guest]: You know goodness and triumphing over evil
[Guest]: And you know the wine I mean like the books of course
[Guest]: Were great but
[Guest]: The scale at which the series was made
[Guest]: Incredible
[Guest]: Every in every I think like
[Guest]: There are two kinds of
[Guest]: You know shows about or shows or movies
[Guest]: About like good and evil
[Guest]: You know shows
[Guest]: Or movies that where
[Guest]: You know that the director believes that
[Guest]: You know they're making good but you kind of know
[Guest]: That you know they lean towards the evil
[Guest]: And kind of know that yeah you can't help it evil is around
[Guest]: And then just you know stuff
[Guest]: That makes you believe that you know there is goodness
[Guest]: Always going to that is going to outlast
[Guest]: And this is just a film that
[Guest]: Fills me with hope a series that fills me with hope
[Amit Varma]: And there's a great inspiring line in it
[Amit Varma]: Which young people everywhere should take out from
[Guest]: All those who wander are not lost
[Guest]: All those who wander are not lost absolutely
[Guest]: I mean Sam for me like
[Guest]: I mean of course just Sam as a character
[Guest]: Is I think the greatest
[Guest]: One of the greatest characters ever made
[Guest]: You know to
[Guest]: The best friend the supporting
[Guest]: Role but you know
[Guest]: He's lifted you know
[Guest]: His character has lifted
[Guest]: This entire series you know because
[Guest]: You think that heroism is about
[Guest]: You know Aragon and Frodo you know going from
[Guest]: One place to another but true heroism
[Guest]: Is also like just the courage to
[Guest]: Support and show love to
[Guest]: The people who are you know
[Guest]: Doing something tough isn't that like
[Guest]: A bigger heroism where you're not even
[Guest]: Getting the credit for it but you're just there
[Amit Varma]: For the journey and such a lovely thought
[Guest]: Yeah man it's just it's so beautiful you know
[Guest]: What is it's it's Frodo is the guy who
[Guest]: Took it to the ring but Sam without Sam he could
[Guest]: Not have happened and Sam I think is
[Guest]: The what a guy
[Guest]: Wow so rings of power a lot of people
[Guest]: Have not have preferred house of the dragon
[Guest]: Over rings of power I would say that please if you're not
[Guest]: Interested watch it again there is so much
[Guest]: Goodness in it there's a you know
[Guest]: Just a
[Guest]: Really lovely line that I
[Guest]: Saw in the last few episodes
[Guest]: Which was like
[Guest]: What's the good of
[Guest]: Living without
[Guest]: Living good if not living
[Guest]: Good and I was just like
[Guest]: Again just the hope
[Guest]: And the optimism it fills me with there
[Guest]: Is always evil lurking but as
[Guest]: Long as people have hope as long as people
[Guest]: You know in the world
[Guest]: You know care for love and as
[Guest]: Long as they care for each other as long as
[Guest]: You're being kind that's
[Guest]: The those are the films that speak to me and the
[Guest]: Films and the shows that I
[Guest]: Yeah
[Guest]: I just I just I'm so fond
[Guest]: Of and there's a hundred other you know
[Guest]: I'm just I'll actually
[Guest]: You know what I'll do and for the sake
[Guest]: Of this episode because this so I'm
[Guest]: Going to just curate a you
[Guest]: Know like a link of some of my
[Guest]: You know
[Guest]: Favorite movie and all time
[Amit Varma]: Recent ones again all time is too difficult
[Guest]: And then I'm going to send it to you because
[Guest]: I really I feel like
[Guest]: It's a responsibility to give
[Guest]: You know recommendations when it comes to
[Guest]: Films and TV finally I also
[Guest]: But yeah I'm going to
[Guest]: I'm going to give you like a link and I'm
[Guest]: Going to recommend some very recent
[Guest]: Of course how can I
[Unknown]: Just
[Guest]: My you know I was
[Guest]: Talking to someone the other day and I was talking about how
[Guest]: You know the earlier like I
[Guest]: Talk about identity of young people and I was so
[Guest]: Funny as talking about how you know earlier
[Guest]: You know for Millennials it was very difficult
[Guest]: To find out identities and then we'd
[Guest]: Find something to kind of relate to
[Guest]: That will make our own identity so for some
[Guest]: People for example films became like their identity
[Guest]: And like you know they'd stick to like I was
[Guest]: Talking about Star Wars fandom you know that being
[Guest]: Star Wars fan is something else etc etc
[Guest]: And then just struck me and I was just like
[Guest]: And for example me
[Guest]: Who has his entire identity
[Guest]: On the internet is Taneja
[Guest]: You know I am that person
[Guest]: I am the person who decided
[Guest]: That pop culture that's where I find comfort
[Guest]: You see I only wear like pop culture
[Guest]: T-shirts you know most of
[Guest]: My home has like all of these action
[Guest]: Figures and posters
[Guest]: And I just find a lot of joy and comfort
[Guest]: In being surrounded by
[Guest]: You know things that I
[Guest]: Movies or stories that have moved
[Guest]: Me and that have that have made me happy
[Guest]: Naz Apna Apna is just the thing
[Guest]: That has made me the happiest I might have watched it about a hundred
[Guest]: Times I can
[Guest]: Narrate I can narrate the whole film
[Guest]: Line by line I think at this point
[Guest]: So
[Amit Varma]: Yeah so Nikhil
[Amit Varma]: We spoke a lot about many things
[Amit Varma]: Today including kindness so thank you
[Amit Varma]: So much for your kindness and giving me so
[Guest]: Much of your time today. Thanks Amit
[Guest]: This is I always like
[Guest]: I am afraid that you know
[Guest]: I speak too much
[Guest]: You know when given the opportunity
[Guest]: But I think this is the first time when I am not
[Guest]: Feeling guilty about it because of you
[Guest]: So thank you for that
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me
[Amit Varma]: Would you like to support the production of this show
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to
[Amit Varma]: SceneUnseen.in slash support
[Amit Varma]: And contribute any amount you like
[Amit Varma]: To keep this podcast alive
[Amit Varma]: And kicking
[Amit Varma]: Thank you